History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Summary: A middle-aged man with hemorrhagic bullous lesions.
A man in his fifties with alcoholic cirrhosis presented to the hospital with a 2-day history of nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fevers, chills, pedal edema, dyspnea, and a painful rash with blisters. The rash on his feet started as erythematous papules, which had evolved into hemorrhagic bullae.
Past Medical History
There was a history of alcohol-induced liver cirrhosis, portal hypertension and hepatic encephalopathy, and he was status post upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding caused by esophageal varices.
Medications
Medications included propranolol, rabeprazole, spironolactone, olanzapine, lactulose, fexofenadine, and multivitamins.
Epidemiological History
He consumed one pint of alcohol every 4-5 days; he did not smoke or use illicit drugs. He had had dinner at a seafood restaurant with his family the day before his illness and ate raw oysters. He had a cat at home and denied recent travel, recent trauma or exposure to fresh or salt water.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared ill and malnourished. The temperature was normal; the blood pressure was 99/74 mm/Hg and pulse 75 beats per minute. There was conjunctival icterus and the abdomen was distended with hepatosplenomegaly. There were spider angiomas on his chest. He had bilateral palmar erythema, and purpuric and hemorrhagic bullous lesions on the arms and legs, with +2 bilateral leg edema (Figures 1, 2, and 3).
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Figure 2. Physical finding.
Figure 3. Physical finding on leg.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 6,500/mm³, hematocrit 29%, platelets 59,000/mm³, and INR 1.87. The level of sodium was 127 mmol/L, potassium 3.3 mmol/L, carbon dioxide (CO2) 18 mmol/L, urea nitrogen 34 mg/dL, creatinine 1.4 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 38 U/L, and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 27 U/L.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Aspirations of bullae showed numerous white blood cells (WBC) and rare gram negative rods on the gram stain. A culture of the aspirate grew Vibrio vulnificus. Blood cultures were negative.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was started on intravenous doxycycline and cefepime on admission. After his culture results were available, the antibiotic therapy was narrowed to doxycycline alone, with improvement. The patient remained hemodynamically stable. He was discharged home after two weeks of treatment.
Discussion
Vibrio vulnificus is a motile gram negative bacillus, part of the normal marine flora. Approximately 50% of oysters and 10% of crabs are culture-positive in the summer. More then 90% of patients report consuming raw oysters. It accounts for 90% of all seafood related deaths in the United States.
Vibrio vulnificus is associated with a severe, distinctive soft tissue infection. It invades the bloodstream of cirrhotic and other susceptible hosts such as patients with iron overload, hemolytic anemia, renal failure, and AIDS. Progression to sepsis is rapid. It causes metastatic cutaneous lesions that start as erythematous lesions evolving to hemorrhagic bullae and necrotic ulcers. Approximately 90% of skin lesions appear on legs.
Patients at risk should avoid uncooked oysters, contact with seawater during warm months, and they should use protective gloves when handling shellfish.
Final Diagnosis
Vibrio vulnificus cellulitis in a patient with cirrhotic liver disease.
References
