History of Present Illness
IDSA 2001 Case and Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: An HIV-positive male with fever, cough, and skin lesions.
An man in his twenties with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was admitted to a hospital after developing a one-week illness with dyspnea, cough productive of yellow and occasionally blood-streaked sputum, fevers, chills, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. He also reported a 3-week history of a rash, with the appearance of unusual skin lesions that initially appeared on his face, then involved his extremities.
Past Medical History
He had had human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection for an unknown duration, and was not adherent with medications. He had formerly used intravenous drugs.
Physical Examination
He was alert and oriented, and appeared mildly ill. The temperature was 99.6 °F (37.6°C); the pulse was 108 beats per minute, and the blood pressure 134/88 mm/Hg. Oral thrush was present. The lungs had diffuse rhonchi and wheezes, and the abdomen was soft without organomegaly. The skin examination is shown in Figures 1, 2, and 3.
Figure 1. Physical findings on face.
Figure 2. Physical findings in mouth.
Figure 3. Physical findings on extremity.
Studies
The white blood cell (WBC) count was 7,300/mm³, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 61 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 66 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 168 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 630 U/L, and bilirubin was normal. The CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count was less than 20 cells/mm³.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Pathological examination of a biopsy of one of the skin nodules was positive for sheets of yeast-like organisms consistent with Cryptococcus. (See Figure 4 for silver stain of biopsy, Figure 5 for mucicarmine stain.) A test of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for cryptococcal antigen (Ag) was positive. Cultures of the blood and sputum grew Cryptococcus.
Figure 4. Silver stain of skin biopsy.
Figure 5. Mucicarmine stain of biopsy.
Treatment and Followup
The patient received amphotericin B for 23 days, followed by oral fluconazole. The skin lesions began to decrease but were still present upon discharge. He was subsequently lost to follow-up.
Discussion
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated cryptococcosis with cutaneous, cerebrospinal fluid and pulmonary involvement in a patient with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
References
