History of Present Illness
2011 January-February Featured Case and 2010 IDSA Fellows' Day Case Presentation Summary: A woman with an ulcerated lesion on her left thumb.
A woman in her fifties developed a large ulcerated lesion on her left thumb (The anatomical site of a lesion is often of both diagnostic and prognostic value. Lesions on exposed areas like the hand can suggest contact with something in the environment. In addition, infections involving functionally important and anatomically complex anatomy like the hand can increase the urgency of appropriate diagnosis and treatment.), which increased in size despite the administration of multiple antibiotics (Failure to respond to multiple antibiotics raises the issue of non-bacterial or non-infectious etiologies.) (see image below). The lesion was initially painless, but became painful (Most acute bacterial soft-tissue infections are painful. Large, painless lesions suggest indolent or atypical pathogens. An initially painless lesion that becomes painful may indicate a secondary process, for example secondary infection of a open lesion.) after swelling increased. Gram stain of a specimen obtained by scraping the skin showed no cells or organisms (Gram stain of an acutely-infected area would typically show neutrophils. Failure to visualize an organism may suggest either a non-infectious process, or a pathogen not visible with Gram stain, which specifically stains bacterial cell walls.), and wet mount revealed no fungal elements. Cultures of tissue (Open wounds offer moisture and nutrients to environmental organisms and may become colonized with a variety of bacteria and fungi. Recovery of a non-pathogen organism from an open wound in an immunocompetent host may indicate colonization rather than deep infection.) grew Rhodotorula minuta. Radiographs of the hand and results of a three-phase bone scan showed soft tissue swelling, with no evidence of osteomyelitis. Empiric antibiotics, tried in successive order over a 3-month period (Chronic progressive lesions unresponsive to this very wide array of antimicrobials would be unusual for common bacterial or fungal infections. On an area such as the hand, with the risk of functional loss, failure of initial therapy should prompt more aggressive attempts at definitive diagnosis.), included amoxicillin-clavulanate, fluconazole, clindamycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, linezolid, levofloxacin, clarithromycin and voriconazole.
She also noted irritation of the left nostril, with brief episodes of epistaxis. She reported no sore throat, fever, chills, dyspnea or cough.
Past Medical History
She had been in good health before this illness.
Epidemiological History
Three months before presentation, she traveled to Ecuador (Prevalence of organisms varies widely by geography; consequently, travel history (including location and duration of stay and any specific exposures) is an important part of an infectious diseases evaluation.) for one month, staying in an ecotourism hotel in the region of the Napo River. She reported no direct water exposure, and did not take malaria prophylaxis or use insect repellent. She reported seeing several different kinds of insects and receiving several bites (Arthropod vectors are responsible for many travel-related infections, so exposure history is important.).
Physical Examination
The patient appeared well. The vital signs (The vital signs listed here are normal, providing some evidence against a systemic infection.) included blood pressure 135/82 mm Hg, pulse 66 beats per minute, temperature 36.7°C (98.1°F), and respirations 18 breaths per minute. There was a large (4 cm in diameter) raised ulcerated lesion with a violaceous border on the thumb (Figure 1), which was painful to the touch. There was no discharge, bleeding, tracking or other lesion seen. Nasal endoscopy revealed a flesh-colored mass in left middle meatus (Figure 2).
Figure 1. Physical findings on left thumb.
Figure 2. Nasal examination.
Studies
Results of routine laboratory testing were normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is a century-old test that provides a rough measure of systemic inflammation. A normal ESR is generally around 0-11 mm/hr; the normal value in this case does not suggest systemic inflammation.) measured 11 millimeters per hour.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A skin biopsy (For cases in which the condition does not resolve and cultures are uninformative, histopathological examination of affected tissue is often the diagnostic maneuver with the highest yield, particularly for organisms that are difficult to culture. Increasingly, PCR-based molecular detection is also being used on biopsy specimens.) (3 mm deep) was performed. Histopathological examination of the tissue with hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stain revealed an amastigote (Amastigote refers to the trypanosomal organisms at the stage of the life-cycle where they do not have flagella.), with kinetoplast in a vacuole (Figure 3). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of the tissue identified Leishmania guyanensis; PCR of the blood and nasal washings was negative for the organism. Culture of tissue from the skin biopsy in Schneider’s Media revealed promastigotes, seen in Figure 4 and in the Video.
Video 1. Culture of skin biopsy tissue in Schneider’s medium.
Figure 3. Skin biopsy, H and E stain.
Figure 4. Culture of skin biopsy tissue in Schneider’s medium.
Treatment and Followup
Liposomal amphotericin B (Amphotericin is a broad-spectrum anti-fungal that binds to ergosterol in fungal cell membranes. The lipid formulation has lower nephrotoxicity. It is also used for some parasitic infections, including leishmaniasis, when the standard therapies of pentavalent antimony or pentamidine are contra-indicated or unavailable.) (3 mg/kg daily for 7 consecutive days, and 1 additional dose one week later) was administered. Upon follow-up one week after treatment, the skin was improving (Figure 5). After three months, there was no recurrence of the lesion (Figure 6). No further treatment was administered.
Figure 5. Follow-up, one week after treatment.
Figure 6. Follow-up at 3 months.
Discussion
Cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL) has historically been divided into Old and New World, the latter referring to the Americas. This patient was diagnosed with Leishmania guyanensis by PCR and culture. Biopsy is key to the diagnosis; tissue stained with H and E or Giemsa may show rounded amastigotes with kinetoplast (as seen in Figure 3).
This patient's exposure and infection most likely occurred during her recent trip to the jungle regions of Ecuador and Napo River. L. guyanensis is found in Guyana, Suriname, Ecuador and northern Amazon basin. L. guyanensis has several mammalian reservoirs [Banuls et al 2007].
The vector is a female sand fly (Lutzomyia spp) that may infect the host during a blood meal. Promastigotes (seen in Figure 4) are injected and then phagocytosed by macrophages and are transformed into amastigotes (Figure 3). Amastigotes rupture out of the cells and are phagocytosed by other reticuloendothelial cells. The cycle is complete when another sand fly ingests the amastigotes by biting non-human mammals; humans are generally accidental hosts and are not bitten with enough frequency to be a major part of the life cycle [Banuls et al 2007]. Clinical symptoms are generally painless, indolent, raised and ulcerating lesions [Magill et al 2005]. Secondary infections and swelling can cause significant pain as in the case of our patient. Mucosal leishmaniasis is limited to certain species with L. guyanensis having a small risk of mucosal involvement. In this patient, the nasal symptoms had resolved before treatment, and nasal endoscopy was thought to be not consistent with leishmaniasis. When there is mucocutaneous involvement, it is one of recrudescence after resolution of primary skin lesions, often a few years later. This patient’s presentation and findings were not consistent with mucocutaneous disease.
Treatment for CL is dependent on the species, geographic origin, evolution of the lesion, and presence or probability of mucosal involvement. Most CL is self-resolving and does not cause systemic disease, but can leave disfiguring scars. The current main treatment is pentavalent antimony, but because of significant side effects and the long duration of treatment, treatment with other drug agents has been investigated [Minodier et al 2007]. Depending on the species, other possible therapies include miltefosine, azoles, and pentamidine [Lai et al 2002]. Currently the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) has approved liposomal amphotericin B for visceral leishmaniasis. While more studies are needed on the use of liposomal amphotericin B for CL, it appears promising [Solomon et al 2007].
Final Diagnosis
Cutaneous leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania guyanensis, after traveling to Ecuador.
References
Banuls, A.L., Hide, M., and Prugnolle, F. (2007). Leishmania and the leishmaniases: a parasite genetic update and advances in taxonomy, epidemiology and pathogenicity in humans. Adv Parasitol 64, 1-109.
PMID:17499100(PubMed abstract) Lai, A.F.E.J., Vrede, M.A., Soetosenojo, R.M., and Lai, A.F.R.F. (2002). Pentamidine, the drug of choice for the treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis in Surinam. Int J Dermatol 41, 796-800.
PMID:12453009(PubMed abstract) Magill AJ. Cutaneous leishmaniasis in the returning traveler. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2005;19:241-266,x-xi.
PMID:15701556(PubMed abstract) Minodier, P., and Parola, P. (2007). Cutaneous leishmaniasis treatment. Travel Med Infect Dis 5, 150-158.
PMID:17448941(PubMed abstract) Solomon, M., Baum, S., Barzilai, A., Scope, A., Trau, H., and Schwartz, E. (2007). Liposomal amphotericin B in comparison to sodium stibogluconate for cutaneous infection due to Leishmania braziliensis. J Am Acad Dermatol 56, 612-616.
PMID:17276541(PubMed abstract)
Banuls, A.L., Hide, M., and Prugnolle, F. (2007). Leishmania and the leishmaniases: a parasite genetic update and advances in taxonomy, epidemiology and pathogenicity in humans. Adv Parasitol 64, 1-109.
PMID:17499100(PubMed abstract)
Lai, A.F.E.J., Vrede, M.A., Soetosenojo, R.M., and Lai, A.F.R.F. (2002). Pentamidine, the drug of choice for the treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis in Surinam. Int J Dermatol 41, 796-800.
PMID:12453009(PubMed abstract)
Magill AJ. Cutaneous leishmaniasis in the returning traveler. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2005;19:241-266,x-xi.
PMID:15701556(PubMed abstract)
Minodier, P., and Parola, P. (2007). Cutaneous leishmaniasis treatment. Travel Med Infect Dis 5, 150-158.
PMID:17448941(PubMed abstract)
Solomon, M., Baum, S., Barzilai, A., Scope, A., Trau, H., and Schwartz, E. (2007). Liposomal amphotericin B in comparison to sodium stibogluconate for cutaneous infection due to Leishmania braziliensis. J Am Acad Dermatol 56, 612-616.
PMID:17276541(PubMed abstract)
