History of Present Illness
IDSA 2002 Case Summary: A woman with confusion and leg pain.
A woman in her fifties from Korea presented with confusion and severe pain in both legs, of one day's duration.
Past Medical History
There was a history of chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection and cirrhosis. She was status post resection of breast cancer more than a decade earlier and status post hemicolectomy for colon cancer 6 months before admission.
Medications
Lamivudine had been started 3 months earlier.
Epidemiological History
She had immigrated to United States more than a decade earlier, and lived alone in suburban New York. She drank alcohol socially, and did not smoke or use intravenous drugs. There was no history of recent travel. She had had lunch in a Chinese restaurant one day before admission, and had no history of recent trauma or exposure to fresh water or salt water.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared drowsy, disoriented, and uncomfortable. The temperature was 104°F (40°C), blood pressure 90/50 mm Hg, pulse 120 beats per minute, and respirations 22 breaths per minute. Sclera and skin were icteric. She was confused, but the neurological examination was otherwise non-focal. Physical findings of the legs are shown in Figures 1, 2, and 3.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Figure 2. Physical finding.
Figure 3. Physical finding.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 4,200/mm³ (band forms 39%); hematocrit 29% and platelet count 30,000/mm³. The level of bilirubin was 4.8 mg/dL (direct 2.7 mg/dL); aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 29 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 60 U/L, creatine kinase (CPK) 94 U/L, prothrombin time (PT) 15.7 seconds, INR 1.9, partial thromboplastin time (PTT) 47 seconds and fibrin split products (FSP) were greater than 40.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The patient underwent surgical debridement. Cultures from the tissue obtained during debridement grew Vibrio vulnificus. Blood cultures were negative.
Treatment and Followup
The patient responded to treatment with ceftazidime and doxycycline, and was finally discharged after three weeks of therapy.
Discussion
Over 300 cases of Vibrio vulnificus infections have been reported to the Center for Disease Control (CDC) since 1988, with the majority from the Gulf coast states. Most cases occur during warmer months when water temperature is high enough to allow rapid growth of the organism. Nearly all oysters harvested in the summer from Chesapeake Bay contain the pathogen, as do 10% of crabs. Cirrhosis is the most common predisposing risk factor for septicemia.
Three clinical syndromes have been described: septicemia, wound infection and GI illness. Blood cultures are usually positive in patients with septicemia. Case fatality rates are as high as 40 to 50% in patients with septicemia. Prognosis is usually good in patient with wound infection and gastrointestinal illness with no predisposing condition. Patients with cirrhosis and other chronic illness should be warned of the hazards of eating raw oysters or exposure of wounds to seawater.
Final Diagnosis
Vibrio vulnificus infection.
References
Horseman, M.A., and Surani, S. (2011). A comprehensive review of Vibrio vulnificus: an important cause of severe sepsis and skin and soft-tissue infection. Int J Infect Dis 15, e157-166.
PMID:21177133(PubMed abstract)
