History of Present Illness
A male in his forties was referred from a neighboring East African country for evaluation of recurrent abdominal pain. One and a half months earlier, he had presented to the referring institution with abdominal pain and features of bowel obstruction leading to a right hemicolectomy for suspected cecal malignancy following which his symptoms resolved briefly. He presented there again five days prior to referral with recurrence of abdominal pain, without signs of bowel obstruction. On arrival, he reported the abdominal pain as constant, worse on the right compared to the left. There was subjective fever, loss of appetite and significant unquantified weight loss but he denied nausea, vomiting, abdominal distention or difficulty in passing flatus and stool.
Past Medical History
His past medical history was unremarkable apart from the recent hemicolectomy.
Medications
He had received intravenous ceftriaxone, crystalloids and analgesics prior to referral.
Epidemiological History
He was a member of the military posted to the neighboring Eastern African country five months prior to onset of symptoms. He did not smoke, consume alcohol or use illicit drugs. There was no animal exposure, sick contacts or family history of malignancy.
Physical Examination
The patient was appeared unwell and was cachectic. The blood pressure was 130/72 mmHg, pulse 63 beats per minute, temperature 97.1°F (36.2°C), and respirations 16 breaths per minute. Oxygen saturation was 98% in ambient air. Abdominal examination revealed a scaphoid abdomen with a healed extended midline scar. There was generalized tenderness worse on the right without guarding or rebound tenderness. Bowel sounds were present and digital rectal examination revealed hard stools in the rectum. Cardiovascular, respiratory and neurological examination was normal. Accompanying the patient was the hemicolectomy specimen in formalin for histopathologic exam.
Studies
Investigations done at admission revealed a mildly elevated white blood count (WBC) at 10.32 x 10 9 /L (reference range, 4-10 x 10 9 /L) with relative and absolute eosinophilia of 9.1% (reference range, 1-6%) and 0.94 x 10 9 /L (reference range, 0.02-0.5 x 10 9 /L) respectively. Hemoglobin level was borderline low at 12.9 g/dL (reference range 13-18) but platelet count was normal at 250 x 10 9 /L (reference range, 150-450 x 10 9 /L). Renal function and liver function tests were within normal limits. Carcinoembryonic antigen was < 0.5 ng/mL (reference range 0-10 ng/mL) and HIV ELISA was negative (reference range, negative).
Computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen done after administration of oral and intravenous contrast revealed evidence of cecectomy and partial right colectomy with ileocolic anastomosis. There was a long segment thickening of the residual right colon and proximal transverse colon spanning 16 cm with a maximum wall thickness of 2.4 cm with regional lymphadenopathy. A 4.8 cm x 2.8 cm hypoattenuating mass that demonstrated progressive post contrast enhancement was seen in hepatic segment III (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Fig 1. Axial (Image A) and coronal (Image B) reformatted images showing diffuse long segment colonic mural thickening in the residual ascending and transverse colon (arrows).
Fig 1. Axial (Image A) and coronal (Image B) reformatted images showing diffuse long segment colonic mural thickening in the residual ascending and transverse colon (arrows).
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A presumptive diagnosis of metastatic colon carcinoma was made based on the history and imaging findings and the patient was receiving supportive therapy awaiting histopathologic results. During that interval, the abdominal pain persisted despite analgesia and spread to involve the epigastric region. Repeat CT scan of the abdomen revealed increased extent of colonic thickening and size of previously seen liver lesion with interval development of a new lesion in segment VIII. Contrasted CT scan of the chest was unremarkable. Laboratory testing at this point revealed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 89 mm/hour (reference range 0-15 mm/hour), elevated C reactive protein of 300 mg/L (reference range, 0-5 mg/L), an elevated IgE level at 2,564 IU/mL (reference range, 0-100 IU/mL) and rising WBC and absolute eosinophil count at 15.43 x 10 9 /L and 1.39 x 10 9 /L respectively. The hemicolectomy specimen grossly revealed a solid, endo-exophytic mass within the cecum and involving the appendix measuring 75 x 65 x 43 mm that was firm and tan-colored on cut surface. Microscopic analysis showed severe inflammation of the submucosa extending to the subserosa, attended by innumerable eosinophils, lymphocytes and plasma cells to a lesser extent. Admixed was foreign-body type granulomatous inflammation, with occasional multinucleated giant cells noted to contain phagocytosed fungal zygospores with a thin eosinophilic outer wall and foamy cytoplasm. Additionally, numerous broad, infrequently septate hyphae surrounded by strongly eosinophilic material (Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon) were observed both on hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stains. There were no features of neoplasia. Ziehl-Neelsen staining was negative for acid fast bacilli (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Fig 2. A, Severe granulomatous inflammation. The arrow shows a foreign-body type multinucleated giant cell engulfing fungal zygospores, characterized by a thin eosinophilic wall and foamy cytoplasm. B, Broad infrequently septate hyphae (arrow) surrounded by strongly eosinophilic material (Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon) in a background of mixed leukocytic infiltrate attended by numerous eosinophils, and to a lesser extent lymphoplasmacytic cells. (Both hematoxylin & eosin X 400).
Fig 2. A, Severe granulomatous inflammation. The arrow shows a foreign-body type multinucleated giant cell engulfing fungal zygospores, characterized by a thin eosinophilic wall and foamy cytoplasm. B, Broad infrequently septate hyphae (arrow) surrounded by strongly eosinophilic material (Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon) in a background of mixed leukocytic infiltrate attended by numerous eosinophils, and to a lesser extent lymphoplasmacytic cells. (Both hematoxylin & eosin X 400).
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A repeat laparotomy was done for source control and to obtain specimen for fungal culture. Intra-operatively a large complex mass involving the ileocolic anastomosis, loop of jejunum and greater curvature of the stomach was noted along with multiple scattered liver lesions. The mass and segment of diseased liver were resected and sent for histopathologic analysis and fungal culture (Figure 3). Histopathologic examination of the liver and ileocolonic anastomosis site showed severe necrotizing granulomatous inflammation attended by numerous eosinophils, lymphocytes, plasma cells and histiocytes. Once again, broad, infrequently septate hyphae surrounded by an eosinophilic sheath (Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon) were identified on both the H&E and PAS stains (Figure 3). Culture on chloramphenicol Sabouraud dextrose agar (CSDA) grew waxy, cream colonies, with deep radiate fissures in 7- 10 days at room temperature. Lactophenol blue preparation revealed characteristic oval to clavate conidia suggestive of Basidiobolus ranarum (Figure 3). This was confirmed in a reference laboratory using VITEK-MS MALDI-ToF® as Basidiobolus ranarum.
Figure 3. Fig 3A-B. A, Surgical resection specimen showing mural thickening of the colon with an adjacent circumscribed mass (asterisk) and necrotic area (arrow). B, Histopathologic examination of colon showing broad, infrequently septate hyphae surrounded by an eosinophilic sheath (Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon) (periodic acid–Schiff stain X 400)
Fig 3A-B. A, Surgical resection specimen showing mural thickening of the colon with an adjacent circumscribed mass (asterisk) and necrotic area (arrow). B, Histopathologic examination of colon showing broad, infrequently septate hyphae surrounded by an eosinophilic sheath (Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon) (periodic acid–Schiff stain X 400)
Figure 4. Fig 3C-D. C, Fungal culture on chloramphenicol Sabouraud dextrose agar showing waxy cream colonies with radiate fissures surrounded by large mucoid enteric colonies. D, Lactophenol blue preparation of culture showing characteristic clavate conidia.
Fig 3C-D. C, Fungal culture on chloramphenicol Sabouraud dextrose agar showing waxy cream colonies with radiate fissures surrounded by large mucoid enteric colonies. D, Lactophenol blue preparation of culture showing characteristic clavate conidia.
Treatment and Followup
Pre-operatively, the patient was started on oral itraconazole at a dose of 200 mg twice a day administered two hours after proton pump inhibitors that were being administered for gastritis. The patient was transitioned to intravenous voriconazole post-operatively followed by oral voriconazole at a dose of 200mg three times a day once he was able to feed orally. He demonstrated clinical improvement on voriconazole therapy with resolution of abdominal pain. Laboratory testing showed resolution of eosinophilia and reduction in IgE levels to 315.6 IU/mL. Therapeutic drug monitoring of voriconazole was not available in our set up. Repeat imaging showed complete resolution of the diffuse colonic wall thickening and hepatic abscesses. The patient was discharged on oral voriconazole 200mg twice daily to complete 6 months of treatment.
Discussion
Basidiobolus ranarum is a saprotrophic fungus found in soil and organic matter in the hot and humid climates of the tropics and subtropics. It is also found in the gastrointestinal tracts and droppings of reptiles and amphibians and on insects which act as host carriers. Hyphae are broad, hyaline coenocytic (aseptate) or infrequently septate and produce sticky asexual conidia that are forcibly discharged. Sexual zygospores have a characteristic beaked appearance. B. ranarum is the etiologic agent of basidiobolomycosis, cases of which concentrate in tropical and subtropics. It predominantly affects children and young adults and males are more frequently affected than females which is a reflection of exposure to the causative agent as a result of social and occupational activities [1]. The usual site of infection is the subcutaneous tissue following inoculation of spores into broken skin, manifesting as painless, erythematous nodular swellings on the limbs, thighs and buttocks. Infrequently, it can cause infections of the gastrointestinal tract (gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis) following ingestion of food, soil or other organic matter contaminated by conidia followed by tissue invasion at sites of mucosal breaks [1,2]. The characteristic response in immunocompetent hosts to B. ranarum infection is an eosinophilic inflammatory response with a blanket of eosinophilic granular material surrounding the hyphae, termed Splendore-Höeppli phenomenon. This occurs as a result of activation of Th2 response to the invading fungal hyphae and is common to basidiobolomycosis and conidiobolomycosis which together constitute entomophthoramycosis, but can also be seen in infections due to Oomycota and parasites. It is however absent in infections due to Mucorales (mucormycosis) which morphologically also have broad coenocytic hyphae similar to Entomophthorales and hence can be used to differentiate the two in histological specimens from immunocompetent individuals [1]. Gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis predominantly affects immunocompetent young males residing in hot and humid areas. Although rare, it is increasingly being recognized and at last review, 102 cases had been described worldwide, mainly from the Middle East with two cases from Africa [3]. Subsequently, a series of seven cases has been published from Sudan [4]. Abdominal pain is the most common presenting feature. Other symptoms include weight loss, fever, constipation, abdominal distention, vomiting, diarrhea and lower gastrointestinal bleeding. The most common examination finding is a palpable mass in the abdomen followed by hepatomegaly. Laboratory investigations reveal eosinophilia in majority of patients and elevated IgE levels. The most common organs involved is the colon followed by the small bowel, liver and stomach with occasional pancreatic involvement. Majority of patients receive an erroneous preliminary diagnosis, most commonly malignancy and inflammatory bowel disease but can include appendicitis, lymphoma, diverticulitis, tuberculosis and amebiasis [3]. The diagnosis becomes apparent during histopathologic examination of surgical or biopsy specimens from affected gastrointestinal organs. Characteristic histologic findings are of tissue eosinophilia, granulomatous inflammation attended by multinuclear giant cells, histiocytes and lymphocytes as well as thin walled, hyaline, coenocytic hyphae surrounded by a blanket of eosinophilic material (Splendore-Höeppli phenomenon). Fungal zygospores may also be seen [1,3]. Definitive diagnosis can be made by culture but specimens are not often submitted for microbiologic studies following initial surgical intervention due to lack of clinical suspicion for an infective cause of the symptoms. Specimens sent for culture should be inoculated on SDA and incubated at room temperature and 37°C. Colonies grow rapidly at 37°C but slower at room temperature and appear flat, waxy, grey-yellow with radial folds. In the absence of culture, fungal deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) present in formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue can be detected using molecular methods. The role of serology in diagnosis is limited by low sensitivity [1,3]. The mainstay of treatment is a combination of surgery followed by systemic antifungal therapy. The optimal drug and duration of therapy has not been established but azoles are generally considered first line agents and treatment duration is usually at least six months. Itraconazole the most widely used azole but there is increasing recent use of voriconazole reported in the literature with good outcomes [3]. In summary gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis is an increasingly recognized manifestation of infection by B. ranarum that is frequently misdiagnosed as malignancy and inflammatory bowel disease. It should be suspected in otherwise healthy young patients from tropical and subtropical regions presenting with abdominal pain, weight loss and fever with radiologically detected thickening or masses of the gastrointestinal tract and peripheral eosinophilia. This will allow a timely and appropriate diagnostic work up and prompt initiation of antifungal therapy, for which azoles are currently the mainstay.
Final Diagnosis
Gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis
References
Vilela R, Mendoza L. Human Pathogenic Entomophthorales. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2018;31(4):e00014-00018.
PMID:30158298(PubMed abstract) Bering J, Mafi N, Vikram HR. Basidiobolomycosis: an unusual, mysterious, and emerging endemic fungal infection. Paediatrics and international child health. 2018;38(2):81-84.
PMID:29846151(PubMed abstract) Pezzani MD, Di Cristo V, Parravicini C, et al. Gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis: An emerging mycosis difficult to diagnose but curable. Case report and review of the literature. Travel medicine and infectious disease. 2019;31:101378.
PMID:30660554(PubMed abstract) Mohammed SA, Abdelsatir AA, Abdellatif M, et al. Challenging Presentations of Seven Cases of Gastrointestinal Basidiobolomycosis in Sudan: Clinical Features, Histology, Imaging, and Recommendations. J Lab Physicians. 2020;12(4):281-284.
PMID:33390679(PubMed abstract)
Vilela R, Mendoza L. Human Pathogenic Entomophthorales. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2018;31(4):e00014-00018.
PMID:30158298(PubMed abstract)
Bering J, Mafi N, Vikram HR. Basidiobolomycosis: an unusual, mysterious, and emerging endemic fungal infection. Paediatrics and international child health. 2018;38(2):81-84.
PMID:29846151(PubMed abstract)
Pezzani MD, Di Cristo V, Parravicini C, et al. Gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis: An emerging mycosis difficult to diagnose but curable. Case report and review of the literature. Travel medicine and infectious disease. 2019;31:101378.
PMID:30660554(PubMed abstract)
Mohammed SA, Abdelsatir AA, Abdellatif M, et al. Challenging Presentations of Seven Cases of Gastrointestinal Basidiobolomycosis in Sudan: Clinical Features, Histology, Imaging, and Recommendations. J Lab Physicians. 2020;12(4):281-284.
PMID:33390679(PubMed abstract)
