History of Present Illness
Summary: A man with a history of renal transplantation in the past presented with a swollen foot.
A man in his fifties, five years after renal allograft for probable diabetic nephropathy, presented with progressive right foot swelling of approximately five days' duration. His symptoms had started with a small ulcer medial to his first metatarsal-phalangeal (MTP) joint, which had drained copious white liquid. The foot was not painful and he denied trauma to his foot. He felt systemically well and reported no subjective fever or rigors.
Past Medical History
He had type II diabetes with nephropathy and peripheral neuropathy, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and was status post renal allograft five years previously.
Medications
He was taking prednisone 20 mg daily, mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg twice daily, tacrolimus 2 mg twice daily, insulin, atenolol and atorvastatin.
Epidemiological History
He denied smoking, alcohol abuse, travel or exposure to pets.
Physical Examination
He was in no acute distress. The temperature was 101.5°F (38.6°C) and other vital signs were stable. The right foot was a swollen, erythematous and warm ( Figures 1 and 2 ). The foot was not tender and the white material draining from the medial aspect of the first metatarsal head was of cottage-cheese consistency.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Figure 2. Physical finding.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 14,300 cells/mm³ (88% neutrophils); the serum level of urea nitrogen was 39 mg/dL, creatinine 1.8 mg/dL; other laboratory studies were normal. A chest radiograph and urinalysis were negative.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was started on vancomycin, clindamycin, and levofloxacin after two sets of blood cultures and a urine culture were obtained. Surgery was consulted.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A gram stain of a specimen of the white exudate ( Figure 3 ) demonstrated very rare gram-positive cocci. The material was also examined under polarizing light (Figure 4) which revealed negatively bi-refringent crystals, which were diagnostic of gout.
Figure 3. Gram stain of discharge.
Figure 4. Joint discharge under polarizing light.
Treatment and Followup
Colchicine was begun and the dose of steroids was temporarily increased. Culture of the exudate grew rare methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, and the vancomycin was continued for soft tissue superinfection.
He did quite well and was discharged home on the fifth hospital day.
Discussion
Many noninfectious inflammatory processes can be confused for infectious diseases. Gout can be a late complication of renal transplant and typically occurs 18-24 months post-transplant. Hyperuricemia is quite common in renal allograft recipients, particularly those on cyclosporine, which may lower tubular secretion and glomerular filtration rate. Perhaps 10-20% of solid-organ allograft recipients suffer one or more episodes of acute gouty arthritis.
Colchicine is the preferred treatment, but increased doses of corticosteroids may be quite helpful. Patients treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be monitored closely for nephrotoxicity, particularly if they are also on cyclosporine.
Final Diagnosis
Gout (podagra) with soft tissue superinfection with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus .
References
Coutlakis, P.J., Roberts, W.N., and Wise, C.M. (2002). Another look at synovial fluid leukocytosis and infection. J Clin Rheumatol 8, 67-71.
PMID:17041325 ( PubMed abstract )
Sack, K. (1997). Monarthritis: differential diagnosis. Am J Med 102, 30S-34S.
PMID:9217557 ( PubMed abstract )
