History of Present Illness
Summary: A young man presented with fevers and a liver abnormality.
A man in his twenties presented to the outpatient Infectious Diseases clinic with fevers of approximately three weeks duration.
The patient was well until fevers, associated with intermittent chills, malaise and low backache, developed as he returned from a visit to a wooded area of New England. There was no history of arthralgias, rash, sore throat, nasal congestion, cough, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, or diarrhea.
One week later, the patient was seen in an outpatient walk-in clinic; he appeared well. The temperature was 102.4°F (39.1°C), pulse 95 beats per minute, and blood pressure 127/75 mm Hg. The remainder of the examination was normal. Initial screening tests revealed a white blood cell count of 13,100 cells/mm³ with 75% polymorphonuclear cells, 15% lymphocytes and 9% monocytes. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 53 mm per hour. Other testing, including Lyme and heterophile antibodies, chest radiograph, and blood cultures, were negative.
The following week, he was reevaluated and the temperature was 100.5°F (38.1°C). A referral to an infectious disease specialist was made, and additional testing was ordered.
On evaluation, he reported temperatures up to 103°F (39.4°C), night sweats, occasional mild low back discomfort when lying flat at night, loss of appetite and a 10-15 pound loss of weight. He denied lymphadenopathy, sore throat, headache, visual changes, cough, shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. Laboratory testing was similar to previous values, except the ESR had increased to 93 mm per hour. One week later, he was admitted to the hospital for further evaluation of persistent fevers.
Past Medical History
He had no allergies and had been in good health except for a brief bout of diarrhea that followed a trip to an island in the Pacific two years earlier, and for which he took antibiotics upon his return. Serologic testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection had been negative approximately two years earlier.
Medications
Medications included acetaminophen up to four times daily as needed for fever.
Epidemiological History
He lived in an urban area in New England, and was monogamous. He drank alcohol moderately, and did not smoke tobacco or use illicit drugs. He had had no sick contacts or exposure to tuberculosis. Recent travel included trips to communities by the ocean in the Northeastern United States and to wooded areas of New England. Two years earlier, he had traveled to an island in the Pacific Ocean, and had visited a travel clinic before his trip.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared well. The temperature was 99.8°F (37.7°C), blood pressure 110/60 mm Hg, pulse 70 beats per minute, respirations 16 breaths per minute, and weight was 198 pounds. The examination was normal.
Studies
On admission, the white blood cell count was 12,400 cells/mm³ with 81% leukocytes, 12% lymphocytes, and 7% monocytes. Hemoglobin was 11.9 gm/dL, hematocrit 34.3% and platelet count 388,000/mm³. The mean corpuscular volume was normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 100 millimeters per hour. Tests of liver function were normal. Cultures of the urine and blood were negative, including cultures for Bartonella and Brucella. A chest radiograph was normal. Testing for heterophile antibody, Lyme antibody, thick and thin smears for Babesia, and serologic testing for syphilis (RPR) and HIV infection were negative. Rheumatoid factor and anti-nuclear antibodies were also negative.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Results of computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen are shown in Figures 1 and 2.
Figure 1. CT scan of the abdomen.
Figure 2. CT scan of the abdomen.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
CT scanning of the abdomen revealed a large-attenuating abnormality in the right lobe of the liver that measured 10.2 centimeters (cm) by 6.6 cm. The abnormality was surrounded by a hypodense rim and had a multiloculated appearance, which was strongly suggestive of a pyogenic hepatic abscess. In addition, there was a dilated tubular structure emanating from the base of the cecum, separate from the terminal ileum, with a calcified rim strongly suspicious for a mucocele of the appendix.
The liver abscess was aspirated and cytological examination of the aspirate showed abundant necrotic debris and neutrophils consistent with pyogenic abscess. Pathological examination showed no evidence of other organisms besides bacteria and no malignant cells were identified. A gram stain of the aspirate is shown in Figure 3. Culture of the material grew methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. Testing for Entamoeba histolytica and Echinococcus was negative.
Figure 3. Gram stain of liver abscess aspirate.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was treated with a two-week course of intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole, followed by oral dicloxacillin for an additional two weeks. The patient did well with resolution of the fevers, increasing energy levels, and weight gain.
Follow up CT scanning of the abdomen, shown in Figure 4, revealed evidence of a resolving liver infarct in the posterior aspect of the right hepatic lobe associated with thrombosis of the branch of right portal vein. Four months after his presentation, laparoscopic appendectomy revealed a low-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the resected appendix is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 4. Follow-up CT scan of the abdomen.
Figure 5. H and E stain of mucocele of the appendix.
Discussion
Pyogenic liver abscess is most commonly due to Enterobacteriaceae and anaerobes, and is often a polymicrobial infection. Staphylococcus aureus is an uncommon cause of pyogenic liver abscess, accounting for less than 10% of cases. Cases of S. aureus liver abscess tend to be monomicrobial.
Final Diagnosis
Liver abscess secondary to methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus, with an underlying appendiceal mucinous neoplasm.
References
Harnik, I.G. (2007). Pyogenic liver abscess presenting after malignant polypectomy. Dig Dis Sci 52, 3524-3525.
PMID:17406839(PubMed abstract) Heneghan, H.M., Healy, N.A., Martin, S.T., Ryan, R.S., Nolan, N., Traynor, O., and Waldron, R. (2011). Modern management of pyogenic hepatic abscess: a case series and review of the literature. BMC Res Notes 4, 80.
PMID:21435221(PubMed abstract) Perez, M.J., Carrillo, J.L., Montin, I.M., and Castellano, A.D. (2007). Liver abscess due to ileocecal perforation: a case report with literature review. Emerg Radiol 14, 241-243.
PMID:17384970(PubMed abstract)
Harnik, I.G. (2007). Pyogenic liver abscess presenting after malignant polypectomy. Dig Dis Sci 52, 3524-3525.
PMID:17406839(PubMed abstract)
Heneghan, H.M., Healy, N.A., Martin, S.T., Ryan, R.S., Nolan, N., Traynor, O., and Waldron, R. (2011). Modern management of pyogenic hepatic abscess: a case series and review of the literature. BMC Res Notes 4, 80.
PMID:21435221(PubMed abstract)
Perez, M.J., Carrillo, J.L., Montin, I.M., and Castellano, A.D. (2007). Liver abscess due to ileocecal perforation: a case report with literature review. Emerg Radiol 14, 241-243.
PMID:17384970(PubMed abstract)
