History of Present Illness
2016 IDWeek Fellows' Day Case Presentation: A previously healthy man in his twenties developed skin lesions on his right flank, thighs, feet and left wrist, which were initially small, dark and verrucous. The lesions on the right flank eventually resolved spontaneously and the other lesions enlarged, with associated inflammation and brown, malodorous discharge. Results of two skin biopsies, performed approximately 2 and 3 months after the onset of the lesions, were non-diagnostic. Multiple courses of doxycycline were administered, without improvement.
Approximately 8 months after the onset of the skin lesions, progressive right-sided back pain and left wrist pain occurred, with no associated fevers or constitutional symptoms. He was seen in an emergency department, where a fluid collection was identified in the area of the right flank and drained, after which the patient returned home. Two weeks later, he returned to the emergency department because of worsening back pain. He was admitted to the hospital, and then transferred to a tertiary hospital for further evaluation and management.
Past Medical History
The patient had previously been in good health.
Medications
He was on no medications.
Epidemiological History
The patient smoked cigarettes and occasionally drank alcohol, and had no history of illicit drug use. He was born in China, moved to the United States several years before this presentation, and returned to visit China frequently. He lived in New England, and had previously lived in Illinois. He was sexually active with his girlfriend, worked with computers and was physically active, including outdoor activities.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared well. The blood pressure was123/80 mmHg, pulse 60 beats per minute, temperature 98.4°F (36.9°C), respirations 18 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 100% while breathing room air. There was mild right flank tenderness and swelling. Multiple discrete lesions were present on the thighs and arms (Figures 1 and 2). There was no lymphadenopathy, and the remainder of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Physical finding on the left posterior thigh.
Figure 2. Physical finding on the anterior right thigh.
Studies
The white cell count was 13,200 per microliter (reference range (ref) 4000-11,000) with 76% neutrophils, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 104 mm per hour (ref 0-15) and C-reactive protein 54 mg per liter (ref 0-7.48); the results of other routine laboratory tests were normal.
A chest radiograph was normal. Other radiographic studies revealed multiple abnormalities, including a destructive lesion of the left distal radial metadiaphysis; multiple peripherally enhancing loculated fluid collections in the paraspinal, psoas, and right gluteal muscle groups bilaterally; and evidence of advanced osteomyelitis with lytic lesions and multiple Brodie’s abscesses in the left greater trochanter and lumbar spine (Figures 3, 4 and 5).
Figure 3. Radiograph of left wrist.
Figure 4. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and extremities.
Figure 5. CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Needle aspiration of the gluteal collection was performed. Hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) staining (Figure 6) and Grocott methenamine-silver (GMS) staining (Figure 7) of the fluid obtained by needle aspiration revealed broad-based budding yeast consistent with Blastomyces dermatitidis. The same organism later grew on cultures. Blastomyces urinary antigen was positive at a level of 2.80 ng/mL (reference range 0.2-14.7).
Figure 6. Pathological examination of the gluteal aspirate (H and E stain).
Figure 7. Pathological examination of the gluteal aspirate (GMS stain).
Treatment and Followup
Liposomal amphotericin B was administered for 6 weeks, followed by oral itraconazole for approximately 18 months. Dose adjustments were made according to measured levels. The patient improved clinically, with decreasing back pain, fading skin lesions (Figure 8), improvement in the appearance of the radiographic abnormalities, and normalization of blood inflammatory markers. The urinary Blastomyces antigen also became undetectable.
Testing for immunocompromising conditions was unrevealing. The HIV test was negative, CD4 T-cell lymphocyte count was 1125 per cubic millimeter (43.3%) and levels of immunoglobulins were normal. Genetic testing revealed no known pathologic variants in interleukin-12 or interferon-gamma pathway genes. The patient did not require surgery after radiologic drainage of gluteal abscess.
Figure 8. Physical findings 10 months after diagnosis.
Discussion
Blastomyces dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus endemic in the United States, predominantly the Mississippi, Ohio and St. Lawrence River Valleys and the Great Lakes regions. It grows as a mold at 25-28°C and a yeast at 37°C with a characteristic broad-based single budding appearance. Endemic/sporadic cases occur most often in normal hosts, but as cellular immunity is the primary host defense mechanism, reactivation can occur in the immunocompromised. The organism is primarily acquired by inhalation, resulting in pneumonia as the most common clinical presentation. Extrapulmonary infection can occur via hematogenous dissemination to the skin/subcutaneous tissue, bone, prostate, central nervous system, or other parts of the body [Bradsher, 2015].
Diagnosis is made by direct visualization of organisms on fungal stains or by positive cultures. Antibody testing lacks sensitivity so is unhelpful in the diagnosis of acute disease. The Blastomyces antigen test can aid with diagnosis and tracking response to therapy [Frost and Novicki, 2015].
Prolonged courses of antifungal therapy are required to achieve cure. Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) treatment guidelines [Chapman et al., 2008] recommend 6-12 months of oral itraconazole for mild to moderate disease. An initial course of liposomal amphotericin B is recommended for those with severe or disseminated disease, or underlying immunocompromise. Vertebral/osteoarticular disease requires even longer courses of therapy – at least one year [Saccente et al., 1998]. The newer azoles are not as well studied but are known to have better central nervous system penetration so are an alternative option in patients with CNS disease.
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated blastomycosis with skin, soft tissue and bone involvement.
References
Bradsher, RW (2015). Chapter 266, Blastomycosis. In Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ (Eds). Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles and practice of infectious diseases. Eighth edition (pp. 2963-73). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2015. Chapman SW, Dismukes WE, Proia LA, Bradsher RW, Pappas PG, Threlkeld MG, Kauffman CA, Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of blastomycosis: 2008 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clinical Infectious Diseases: An official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 2008;46(12):1801-12.
PMID:18462107(PubMed abstract) Frost HM, Novicki TJ. Blastomyces Antigen Detection for Diagnosis and Management of Blastomycosis. Journal of clinical microbiology. 2015;53(11):3660-2.
PMID:26338856(PubMed abstract) Saccente M, Abernathy RS, Pappas PG, Shah HR, Bradsher RW. Vertebral blastomycosis with paravertebral abscess: report of eight cases and review of the literature. Clinical Infectious Diseases: An official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 1998;26(2):413-8.
PMID:9502464(PubMed abstract)
Bradsher, RW (2015). Chapter 266, Blastomycosis. In Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ (Eds). Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles and practice of infectious diseases. Eighth edition (pp. 2963-73). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2015.
Chapman SW, Dismukes WE, Proia LA, Bradsher RW, Pappas PG, Threlkeld MG, Kauffman CA, Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of blastomycosis: 2008 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clinical Infectious Diseases: An official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 2008;46(12):1801-12.
PMID:18462107(PubMed abstract)
Frost HM, Novicki TJ. Blastomyces Antigen Detection for Diagnosis and Management of Blastomycosis. Journal of clinical microbiology. 2015;53(11):3660-2.
PMID:26338856(PubMed abstract)
Saccente M, Abernathy RS, Pappas PG, Shah HR, Bradsher RW. Vertebral blastomycosis with paravertebral abscess: report of eight cases and review of the literature. Clinical Infectious Diseases: An official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 1998;26(2):413-8.
PMID:9502464(PubMed abstract)
