History of Present Illness
A man in his mid-fifties with known hypertension and osteoarthritis, presented with a several-month history of progressively worsening headache, dizziness, blurry vision, ataxia, and vomiting. The patient’s problems began approximately four months prior, soon after he had a tooth extraction done while traveling to Nevada. He received antibiotics after the procedure, and then developed a generalized maculopapular, scaly rash, that was worst on the extremities. The rash failed to resolve with topical lubricants. Over the following weeks, he developed the aforementioned neurological symptoms. His work-up included a head MRI, which showed a two-centimeter mass in the right occiput concerning for abscess versus malignancy. He was referred to a tertiary medical center for further evaluation.
Past Medical History
The patient had a history of well-controlled hypertension, osteoarthritis, and chronic sinusitis. Additionally, he had a two-year history of a non-healing occipital scalp wound. Skin biopsies of the wound showed Staphylococcus epidermidis and Histoplasma (unknown species), for which he was prescribed cephalexin and fluconazole. However after approximately three months of treatment, he demonstrated minimal improvement.
Medications
Upon admission, the patient was taking metoprolol tartrate; cephalexin 500 mg by mouth, three times daily; and fluconazole 100 mg by mouth, once daily.
Allergies
The patient has an allergy to penicillin, which causes a rash.
Epidemiological History
The patient lived on a ranch in the rural southwest of the U.S. He took care of multiple animals including horses, goats, sheep and chickens. His previous work involved travel to the east and west coasts, with recent travel to Nevada and Texas.
Physical Examination
Upon admission to the hospital, the patient was in no acute distress. Temperature was 98.4 ° F (36.9 ° C), heart rate 88 beats per minute, blood pressure 149/86 mm/Hg, respirations 16 breaths per minute, with an oxygen saturation 92% on room air. His physical exam was significant for sub-centimeter cervical lymphadenopathy, and decreased air entry in the bilateral lung fields; heart and abdominal exam were unremarkable. Skin exam revealed a 2 cm x 2 cm partially healed ulcer in the occiput (Figure 1). He also had a diffuse, maculopapular, raised, scaly, hypertrophied rash with excoriations (Figure 2). Neurological exam was significant for dysdiadokinesis, without nystagmus.
Figure 1. Non-healing ulcer on occiput
Figure 2. Maculopapular skin rash on left shin.
Studies
The patient’s white blood cell count was 12.5 x 10 3 (reference range: 4.0-10.5 x 10 3) per microliter with 84% neutrophils and 0% eosinophils. Complete blood count was otherwise within normal limits, and basic metabolic panel had no abnormalities. The patient’s alanine transaminase was 73 units /L (reference range 10-40 units/L); the hepatic function panel was otherwise normal. HIV and Hepatitis C serology were negative. MRI of the brain with and without contrast showed a dominant 2.1 x 2.4 cm ring enhancing lesion in the right cerebellar hemisphere, suspicious for abscess (Figure 3). CT of the chest with contrast showed bilateral lower lobe atelectasis, and multiple sub 4-mm pulmonary nodules scattered throughout, with the incidental finding of borderline adrenal hyperplasia. Peripheral blood cultures were ultimately negative for yeast or bacteria.
Figure 3. MRI Brain with contrast showing a ring-enhancing lesion in the R cerebellar hemisphere.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was admitted, and started on broad-spectrum antibiotics with vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole. Five days later, the patient underwent brain abscess aspiration with purulent material sent for gram stain, and bacterial and fungal cultures. Dermatology was consulted for the biopsy of the rash and of the occipital wound.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Serologies for Coccidiodes IgG/IgM, Blastomyces antibodies, and urine Histoplasma antigen were all negative. Biopsies of the skin from the upper extremity, and scalp showed yeast consistent with Histoplasma capsulatum (Figures 4, 5). After two-and-a-half weeks brain abscess fungal cultures grew mold, with cotton blue staining consistent with Histoplasma capsulatum (Figure 6). The diagnosis was confirmed by PCR of the brain and skin tissue. Bacterial cultures on the brain tissue remained negative.
Figure 4. Scalp biopsy, GMS stain
Figure 5. Skin of the arm, GMS stain
Figure 6. Brain abscess culture, cotton blue stain.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was treated for disseminated histoplasmosis with CNS involvement. Liposomal amphotericin B was added to the antimicrobial regimen. One week later, he developed acute kidney injury, with an increase in creatinine from 0.7 mg/dL to 2.3 mg/dL (reference range 0.6-1.6 mg/dL). His antibiotics were narrowed to ceftriaxone and metronidazole, and his antifungal therapy was switched to itraconazole 200 mg by mouth twice daily. The patient did not achieve therapeutic itrazonazole levels and was switched to voriconazole 200 mg by mouth twice daily, with excellent clinical response. Finally, because of the possibility of a bacterial component in the setting of symptoms of systemic infection beginning shortly after a tooth extraction, antibiotics were continued for a total of four weeks.
Discussion
Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimorphic fungus that is endemic to North and South America, although it has also been found in parts of East Asia, Southeast Asia, and India [1]. Disease is associated with exposure to decaying guano. The most common manifestations of histoplasmosis are acute pulmonary histoplasmosis, usually a self-limiting infection; and chronic cavitary pulmonary histoplasmosis, which typically occurs in older patients [2].
Complications of the disease include disseminated histoplasmosis and CNS involvement. Immunosuppressed patients are the most at risk for development of disseminated disease [2], however, immunocompetent patients are increasingly being identified. Our case highlights the importance of keeping this diagnosis in the differential of immunocompetent patients. Nearly all patients present with neurological symptoms as their chief complaint, including encephalopathy, seizures, blurry vision, and weakness. Definitive diagnosis is through culture of the organism. Serology, particularly a urine Histoplasma antigen, are helpful when positive, with a reported sensitivity of up to 95% in AIDS patients. However, there are limited data regarding sensitivity in immunocompetent patients [2] and a negative result cannot exclude the diagnosis. As such, our case demonstrates the limitations of serological testing.
Current guidelines recommend treating CNS histoplasmosis with liposomal amphotericin B for four to six weeks, followed by itraconazole for at least one year, until clinical resolution of disease [3]. Notably, there are cases where voriconazole has been used successfully. In these instances, the patients recovered well and had no re-activation of disease [4] [5]. Our patient was ultimately transitioned to voriconazole with a planned course of one year. Follow-up MRI at one and three months post-op showed no residual abscess, and his neurological symptoms have completely resolved.
This case demonstrates the importance of maintaining a broad differential in all patients who present with sub-acute neurological symptoms. A detailed history, including exposure history, is critical for a thorough evaluation. Finally, there is a possibility that voriconazole may be an acceptable alternative to itraconazole therapy.
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated Histoplasma capsulatum with right cerebellar abscess
References
Wheat LJ, Azar MM, Bahr NC, Spec A, Relich RF, Hage C. Histoplasmosis. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2016; 30(1): 207-27.
PMID:26897068(PubMed abstract) Kauffman CA. Histoplasmosis: a clinical and laboratory update. Clin Microbiol Rev 2007; 20(1): 115-32.
PMID:17223625(PubMed abstract) Wheat LJ, Freifeld AG, Kleiman MB, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of patients with histoplasmosis: 2007 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45(7): 807-25.
PMID:17806045(PubMed abstract) Hott JS, Horn E, Sonntag VK, Coons SW, Shetter A. Intramedullary histoplasmosis spinal cord abscess in a nonendemic region: case report and review of the literature. J Spinal Disord Tech 2003; 16(2): 212-5.
PMID:12679679(PubMed abstract) Srinivasan J, Ooi WW. Successful treatment of histoplasmosis brain abscess with voriconazole. Arch Neurol 2008; 65(5): 666-7.
PMID:18474746(PubMed abstract)
Wheat LJ, Azar MM, Bahr NC, Spec A, Relich RF, Hage C. Histoplasmosis. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2016; 30(1): 207-27.
PMID:26897068(PubMed abstract)
Kauffman CA. Histoplasmosis: a clinical and laboratory update. Clin Microbiol Rev 2007; 20(1): 115-32.
PMID:17223625(PubMed abstract)
Wheat LJ, Freifeld AG, Kleiman MB, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of patients with histoplasmosis: 2007 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45(7): 807-25.
PMID:17806045(PubMed abstract)
Hott JS, Horn E, Sonntag VK, Coons SW, Shetter A. Intramedullary histoplasmosis spinal cord abscess in a nonendemic region: case report and review of the literature. J Spinal Disord Tech 2003; 16(2): 212-5.
PMID:12679679(PubMed abstract)
Srinivasan J, Ooi WW. Successful treatment of histoplasmosis brain abscess with voriconazole. Arch Neurol 2008; 65(5): 666-7.
PMID:18474746(PubMed abstract)
