History of Present Illness
2007 May Featured Case Summary: A seven-month-old boy presented in autumn with constipation, lethargy and hypotonia.
Two weeks before admission, a seven-month-old boy developed constipation, which resolved after the addition of prune juice to his diet. Seven days before admission, he appeared more subdued, tired and lethargic, and had longer periods of sleeping and less spontaneous activity. Three days before admission, he was evaluated as an outpatient by his pediatrician and was then observed in the emergency department. He appeared well, was afebrile with a normal physical examination. The hematocrit was 31.1% and reticulocytes 0.9%, serum carbon dioxide 20.7 mmol/L, and globulin 1.9 g/dl (reference range 2.6-4.1 g/dl); other laboratory test results including other electrolytes, liver function tests, and creatine kinase were normal. A radiograph of the chest and abdomen, shown in Figure 1, revealed fecal loading. A blood culture was sterile and an abdominal ultrasound was normal.
The following day, his oral intake and his activity level improved. However symptoms recurred over the next two days. On the morning of admission, he was as floppy "as a rag doll" when his mother picked him up. Emergency medical services were called and he was brought to the emergency department by ambulance for reevaluation, and admitted to the hospital.
[Figure 1. Radiograph of the chest and abdomen.]
Figure 1. Radiograph of the chest and abdomen.
Past Medical History
He was born at 41 weeks gestation by cesarean section, and had previously been well. Developmental milestones were met early or on time, including sitting at 5 months and crawling at 6 months. In the weeks preceding admission, he was pulling to stand and cruising. His diet consisted of breast milk and solids. There was no history of honey ingestion.
Medications
He had had routine childhood immunizations, and had received the second dose of influenza vaccine two days before the onset of symptoms.
Epidemiological History
Several months earlier, in summer, he had traveled to Cape Cod, Massachusetts.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared sleepy and moved gently to light touch. The pulse was 112 beats per minute, temperature 98.9°F (37.2°C), blood pressure 77/33 mm Hg, and respirations 26 breaths per minute, with an oxygen saturation of 100% while breathing ambient air. The weight was 7.54 kg (10-25th percentile) and length 74 centimeters (cm) (97th percentile). The head circumference was 45 cm (50th percentile). The neurologic exam revealed diffuse low tone with head lag. The pupils were reactive and the remainder of the physical examination was normal.
Studies
Laboratory test results revealed a white count of 8100 cells/mm³ (20% neutrophils, 73% lymphocytes, 4% monocytes, 2% eosinophils, and 1% basophils), hematocrit of 31.2%, and platelet count 340,000/mm³. Serum carbon dioxide was 19.2 mmol/L, with an anion gap of 15.8. Serum glucose was 49 mg/dl (reference range 70-100 mg/dl). Urinalysis revealed 2+ ketones, and was otherwise normal.
Computed tomography (CT) scanning of the head and an electroencephalogram were normal.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A lumbar puncture revealed two red cells and two white cells per cubic millimeter, with normal glucose and protein levels. Intravenous fluids were administered, including glucose and normal saline. Hydrocortisone (stress dose) was also given intravenously on admission, but was stopped after a cortisol level drawn before treatment and a cosyntropin stimulation test, performed off hydrocortisone for 24 hours, were normal. Cultures of specimens of blood, stool and cerebrospinal fluid were sterile. Tests for serum Lyme antibody, and cerebrospinal fluid and nasal washings for adenovirus, influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, and respiratory syncytial virus were negative. A toxic screen and lead screen were negative. Serum protein electrophoresis and amino acid levels were normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with contrast enhancement was normal. On the third hospital day, a barium swallow was performed and revealed tertiary esophageal contractions, slow movement of barium and transient stasis of barium in the esophagus. There was no evidence of aspiration (Figures 2 and 3). The patient's condition gradually deteriorated with the development of ptosis bilaterally, hyporeflexia, decreasing suck and oral intake. On the fifth hospital day, a nasogastric feeding tube was placed because of increasing pooled secretions, absent gag reflex and an inability to protect the airway. The patient was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit. By the seventh hospital day, the patient was using his diaphragm with abdominal breathing and was not using chest wall muscles, and the trachea was intubated.
[Figure 2. Barium swallow.] [Figure 3. Barium swallow.]
Figure 2. Barium swallow.
Figure 3. Barium swallow.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Nerve conduction studies revealed motor responses with low amplitude in the ulnar nerves bilaterally, and borderline low amplitude of left median and left tibial nerves. High frequency repetitive nerve stimulation revealed incremental response of the right ulnar nerve (98% increase in amplitude), left ulnar nerve (74%), left median nerve (52%), and left tibial nerve (37%). Median and sural nerve sensory potentials on the left were normal.
The results of high frequency repetitive nerve stimulation were consistent with a pre-synaptic neuromuscular junction disorder (infantile botulism). A stool sample was sent to the state laboratory for testing for botulinum toxin and was positive for Clostridium botulinum neurotoxin type B.
Treatment and Followup
Anti-botulism immune globulin was administered. The patient improved and the trachea was extubated within five days of receiving the treatment. The gag reflex and ability to suck and swallow improved gradually, and he was discharged three weeks after admission, with outpatient physical therapy. Follow-up in the outpatient neurology clinic at age nine months revealed a delightful infant with normal neurologic function and meeting all developmental milestones.
Discussion
The key clinical features of this case include the progressive onset of cranial nerve findings (ptosis; swallowing difficulty; weakening cry; loss of gag reflex); autonomic dysfunction (constipation); and marked hypotonia in a child of seven months, whose gross-motor milestones had previously been on time.
Intracerebral bleeding and masses were excluded by negative imaging studies. Multiple non-infectious causes of hypotonia were considered. These included spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) Types 1 and 2, which affect anterior horn cells. The onset of SMA-1 (Werdnig-Hoffman disease) is seen in the first 3 months, making it unlikely. SMA-2 (infantile types A and B) typically has a later age of onset, in the middle of the first year. Pompe disease, the glycogen storage disease most likely to present in infancy, is diagnosed at a mean age of roughly four months. Congenital myasthenia gravis (MG), is not necessarily present at birth, unlike neonatal MG, which is secondary to mother's illness. Porphyria can cause hypotonia and muscle weakness that often begins proximally in legs with loss of reflexes, and then associated with cranial nerve and autonomic dysfunction. Fatty-acid oxidation and organic acid disorders, and mitochondrial diseases were also considered, but would have been more likely to occur in the setting of antecedent metabolic stress. Acute immune-mediated polyneuropathy (Guillain-Barre syndrome), in the setting of recent vaccinations, was also of concern.
Infectious etiologies of the neurological clinical findings included infant botulism and tick paralysis. His vital signs did not suggest acute infection and results of laboratory testing, including cultures of blood and cerebrospinal fluid, and Lyme serology, were negative. Physical examination did not reveal the presence of a tick, excluding tick paralysis. The results of the high frequency repetitive nerve stimulation supported the diagnosis of pre-synaptic neuromuscular junction disorder consistent with infant botulism. Identification of Clostridium botulinum neurotoxin type B in the stool confirmed the diagnosis.
In infant botulism (as with a similar but very rare illness described in adults), spores of C. botulinum are ingested and then germinate in the intestine, producing toxin that is subsequently absorbed systemically to cause irreversible disruption of acetylcholine release by presynaptic nerve terminals. Other forms of botulism include food-borne botulism in which pre-formed toxin is consumed, and wound botulism in which the toxin is produced in vivo in a wound that infected with C. botulinum. Inhalation botulism is a syndrome that could be seen as part of a bioterrorism event.
Treatment of infant botulism consists of supportive care, meticulous monitoring for respiratory failure, and treatment with antitoxin. If administered sufficiently early, treatment of babies who have infant botulism with human anti-botulism immune globulin (BIG-IV or babyBIG) has been shown to markedly decrease time to recovery by a period of weeks [Arnon et al 2006]. Antibiotics should be avoided to avoid increased release and adsorption of toxin.
Final Diagnosis
Infant botulism, due to Clostridium botulinum neurotoxin type B.
References
Arnon, S.S., Schechter, R., Maslanka, S.E., Jewell, N.P., and Hatheway, C.L. (2006). Human botulism immune globulin for the treatment of infant botulism. N Engl J Med 354, 462-471.
PMID:16452558(PubMed abstract)
