History of Present Illness
A woman in her 70s, originally from Ethiopia, was brought into the emergency department (ED) after developing respiratory distress at a subacute rehabilitation center; upon arrival in the ED, she had rapid respiratory deterioration requiring intubation. The patient had a history of a left frontal glioblastoma multiforme resected 3 months ago; she was subsequently treated with adjuvant radiotherapy and dexamethasone 4 mg twice daily, complicated by steroid-induced diabetes. She also had Clostridium difficile colitis 3 weeks ago, and was on a 6-week tapering course of oral vancomycin.
On admission, she was in septic shock with a high lactic acid level of 2.27 mmol/L (normal range, 0.5-2.0 mmol/L), systolic blood pressures of 60s and tachycardia. She was noted to have significant loose watery stools. She was started empirically on intravenous vancomycin, ceftazidime and metronidazole and enteric vancomycin and intravenous dexamethasone.
Past Medical History
Hypertension on aldactone; gastroesophageal reflux disease
Medications
Dexamethasone; Lacosamide (anti-epileptic); Enteric Vancomycin taper
Social History
She had immigrated to the US nearly 10 years ago from Ethiopia. She does not use alcohol, tobacco or illicit drugs.
Physical Examination
She was intubated and ventilated. Maximum temperature over 24 hours 37.4°C (99.3°F); blood pressure 100-110/60-70s; pulse 98, respiratory rate 32; FIO2 50%/PEEP 5. She had marked bilateral crepitations throughout her lung fields and especially prominent at the bases. She had no cardiac murmurs. Her abdomen was distended but soft with hypoactive bowel sounds. Rectal tube was in situ with copious watery clear stool. There was diffuse pitting edema of her trunk, arms, and legs.
Studies
Chest X-ray showed extensive bilateral infiltrates (Figure 1). Colonic gaseous distension (primarily in the sigmoid colon) was seen on abdominal X-ray (Figure 2).
She had a normocytic anemia with a hemoglobin of 7.7 g/dL (normal range, 11.4-14.4) and MCV of 94 fl. Her white cell count was normal with a normal differential. She had mild electrolyte abnormality with a slightly low sodium, potassium and calcium. Liver function tests were normal.
Respiratory Viral PCR, stool Clostridium difficile toxin and blood cultures were negative. Urine culture revealed E. coli. Bronchoalveolar lavage (performed by a catheter without a bronchoscope or camera) showed 27,111 cells (97% PMNs, 3% macrophages, no squamous cells); cultures showed no growth.
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed small non-occlusive acute pulmonary emboli and diffuse alveolar and interstitial opacities with ground glass opacifications and architectural distortion most severe in the right upper lobe (Figures 3 and 4). The abdomen had dilated fluid-filled descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum with mild wall thickening consistent with mild colitis. CT brain showed changes consistent with left frontal tumor resection.
Figure 1. Admission portable chest radiograph with widespread bilateral bronchogenic opacities.
Figure 2. Admission abdominal radiograph showing extensive colonic gaseous distension primarily in the sigmoid colon.
Figure 3. CT scan of chest (axial view) showing diffuse alveolar and interstitial opacities with ground-glass opacities.
Figure 4. CT scan of chest (coronal view) showing diffuse alveolar and interstitial opacities with ground-glass opacities.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Stool ova and parasite testing was positive for Strongyloides stercoralis (Figure 5). Given her immunocompromised state (on chronic steroids), stool evidence of Strongyloides, extensive pulmonary infiltrates and septic shock, there was concern for Strongyloides stercoralis hyperinfection syndrome. The BAL ova and parasite testing was also positive for Strongyloides sterocoralis (Figure 6). Her serum Strongyloides IgG by Elisa was negative. Although she never had peripheral eosinophilia during this admission, in retrospect she demonstrated eosinophilia of 16% four months ago (prior to surgery and steroids).
Figure 5. Stool ova and parasites showing Strongyloides
Figure 6. BAL showing Strongyloides
Treatment and Followup
She was treated with oral ivermectin and albendazole and her BAL and stools were negative for Strongyloides after one week. Unfortunately she developed progressive worsening respiratory status, hemodynamic instability, and died several weeks into her hospitalization.
Discussion
Strongylodies stercoralis is a parasitic nematode endemic in Southeast Asia, Latin America, Sub-Saharan African, and parts of the Southeast United States.[1] It is estimated that 30-100 million people are infected worldwide.[2] Symptoms of Strongyloides infection can range from asymptomatic to a hyperinfection syndrome, the latter of which can carry mortality up to 90%.[3] Impaired host immunity, such as corticosteroids and immunosuppressants, can lead to an overwhelming number of larvae. Despite this, in hyperinfection syndrome, peripheral eosinophilia is often absent.[3]
Signs and symptoms that can be seen with Strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome include gastrointestinal manifestations (nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, ileus, obstruction, peritonitis) and pulmonary manifestations (coughing, wheezing, consolidations on chest imaging, respiratory failure). Other manifestations include neurologic complications (aseptic or gram negative meningitis) and recurrent gram negative bacteremia/sepsis from larvae carrying bacteria that penetrate mucosal walls. Skin manifestations, including maculopapular or urticarial rash, can be found anywhere on the skin but usually on the buttocks, perineum and thighs.[3] Autoinfection is a unique characteristic of Strongyloides in which it is able to reenter the host’s circulation (via the perianal mucosa) allowing for continuous multiplication.
The Centers for Disease Control recommends consideration of screening for Strongyloides in patients with the following conditions: HTLV-1 infection; hematologic malignancies (including leukemias and lymphomas); organ transplant recipients or candidates; persistent or unexplained eosinophilia; recent or remote travel histories to endemic areas; those who are on, or about to begin, corticosteroid therapy or other immunosuppressants.[3] The sensitivity of serologic testing in chronic intestinal Strongyloidiasis is approximately 90% but there is potential for false positive results.[5] False positive results can occur with cross-reaction with other filarial parasites. In Strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome, there is possibility for false-negative results in immunocompromised patients.[5] While eosinophilia may serve as a clue to underlying parasitic diseases, the peripheral eosinophil count is rarely elevated in patients with Strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome.[5]
The diagnosis of Strongyloides stercoralis infection requires a high index of suspicion. The prompt diagnosis of hyperinfection syndrome is of utmost importance due to high patient mortality. Strongyloides should be considered in patients from endemic areas who are immunocompromised, especially if on corticosteroids, and even in those who lack peripheral eosinophilia. Strongyloides is often treated with ivermectin.[3] Treatment of Strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome includes stopping or reducing immunosuppressive therapy, if possible, and enteric ivermectin daily until stool and/or sputum examinations are negative for 2 weeks.[3] Parenteral ivermectin is FDA approved for veterinary use only. There are case reports of improved efficacy of combination treatment with ivermectin and albendazole.[4]
Lessons learned from this case include considering Strongyloides in the differential diagnosis of patients from endemic areas; screening patients from endemic areas prior to starting immunosuppressive agents (including corticosteroids); and that serum eosinophilia may be absent, and Strongyloides serology may be negative, in hyperinfection syndrome.
Final Diagnosis
Strongyloides stercoralis Hyperinfection in an immunocompromised patient on chronic steroids
References
Puthiyakunnon S, Boddu S, Li Y, Zhou X, Wang C, Li J, Chen X. Plos Negl Trop Dis (2014) Strongyloidiasis--an insight into its global prevalence and management. Aug 2014;8(8):e3018. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003018.
PMID:25121962(PubMed abstract) World Health Organization: Strongyloidiasis (2017) http://www.who.int/intestinal_worms/epidemiology/strongyloidiasis/en/ Centers for Disease Control (2016) https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/strongyloides/health_professionals/index.html Pornsuriyasak P, Niticharoenpong K, Sakapibunnan A (2004) Disseminated strongyloidiasis successfully treated with extended duration ivermectin combined with albendazole: a case report of intractable strongyloidiasis. Southeast Asian J Trop Health Hyg. 2004; 35:531-534
PMID:15689061(PubMed abstract) Roxby AC, Gottlieb GS, Limaye AP (2009) Strongyloides in transplant patients, Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Nov 1;49(9):1411-23. doi: 10.1086/630201.
PMID:19807271(PubMed abstract)
Puthiyakunnon S, Boddu S, Li Y, Zhou X, Wang C, Li J, Chen X. Plos Negl Trop Dis (2014) Strongyloidiasis--an insight into its global prevalence and management. Aug 2014;8(8):e3018. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003018.
PMID:25121962(PubMed abstract)
World Health Organization: Strongyloidiasis (2017) http://www.who.int/intestinal_worms/epidemiology/strongyloidiasis/en/
Centers for Disease Control (2016) https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/strongyloides/health_professionals/index.html
Pornsuriyasak P, Niticharoenpong K, Sakapibunnan A (2004) Disseminated strongyloidiasis successfully treated with extended duration ivermectin combined with albendazole: a case report of intractable strongyloidiasis. Southeast Asian J Trop Health Hyg. 2004; 35:531-534
PMID:15689061(PubMed abstract)
Roxby AC, Gottlieb GS, Limaye AP (2009) Strongyloides in transplant patients, Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Nov 1;49(9):1411-23. doi: 10.1086/630201.
PMID:19807271(PubMed abstract)
