History of Present Illness
2008 ICAAC/IDSA Fellows' Day Case Presentation Summary: A man with fevers, cough, chest pain and axillary swelling after traveling to Hawaii for a competitive canoe race.
A man in his fifties was well until 2 days before presentation, when cough, fevers, sweats, pleuritic chest pain, malaise, and swelling under his left arm developed. Twenty-four hours earlier, he had returned from a trip to Hawaii, during which he had participated in an outrigger canoe race. He was seen in the Emergency Department of a community hospital 12 hours after the onset of his symptoms. A chest radiograph was normal, and community-acquired pneumonia was presumptively diagnosed. He was prescribed levofloxacin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and discharged.
At 72 hours after his return from Hawaii, right anterior chest wall swelling and left eye injection developed. He presented to another hospital for further evaluation.
Past Medical History
There was a history of an appendectomy and shoulder surgery in the past, and episodic rashes.
Allergies
He had no drug allergies.
Social History
He was married with adult children.
Epidemiological History
He worked in a biomedical field, with no laboratory or patient care activities.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared ill and diaphoretic, with frequent coughing. The blood pressure was 100/56 mm Hg, pulse 116 beats per minute, temperature 39°C (102.2°F), and respirations 24 breaths per minute. The left eye was injected ( Figure 1 ) and painful; vision was intact. A left axillary nodule was tender, warm and measured 1 inch in diameter. There were rhonchi in multiple lung fields and decreased breath sounds especially at the left base, without any dullness. A warm, firm erythematous mass, which was not fluctuant or tender, protruded below the right clavicle along the pectoral muscle ( Figure 2 ). Cardiovascular examination revealed tachycardia with hyperdynamic state and no murmur. The rest of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Figure 2. Physical finding.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 16,160 cells per cubic millimeter (reference range: 4500-11,000), with 84% polymorphonuclear cells, 2% band forms, 7% lymphocytes and 7% monocytes. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate measured 81 millimeters per hour (reference range 0-15) and C-reactive protein 14.1 milligrams per deciliter (0-0.5 mg/dl).
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed multiple abnormalities. There was a mass-like infiltrate, which measured 3.3 by 3.4 centimeters, in the medial right upper lobe with central hypodensity and air. There was extension of soft tissue density into the superior mediastinum and anterior chest wall with thickening of intercostal muscles and right pectoral muscle. Soft tissue stranding was noted in the subcutaneous fat of the anterior chest wall with skin thickening. There were enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes in the right paratracheal and subcarinal regions as well as right axillary lymphadenopathy. The left medial upper lung demonstrated a small nodule with central hyperdensity. A trace pericardial effusion, small loculated complex right pleural effusion with adjacent pleural thickening and enhancement, and an adjacent ill-defined infiltrate in the posterior right lower lobe were noted, as well as multiple small nodules in both lungs. ( Figures 3 and 4 ).
Figure 3. CT of the chest, chest wall and mediastinal view.
Figure 4. CT scan (lung view).
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was evaluated in the Emergency Department of the 2nd hospital 72 hours after returning from Hawaii. After multiple blood cultures were drawn, antibiotics were administered intravenously. He was admitted to the Medicine Service, and Infectious Diseases, ophthalmology, and thoracic surgery consultations were requested. A trans-thoracic echocardiogram was performed.
Ninety-six hours after returning from Hawaii, because of the rapidly progressive nature of the infection, he was taken urgently for thoracic surgery. A right thoracotomy, with mediastinal debridement, decortication of right upper, middle, and lower lobes, and incision and drainage of a chest wall abscess were performed. The postoperative diagnosis was metastatic infection with empyema necessitans involving the right hemithorax, mediastinum, and anterior chest wall.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Cultures of specimens of blood, operative specimens and swabs of the eye grew methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus . Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing was positive for Panton Valentine Leukocidin. The organism was resistant to clindamycin, ciprofloxacin, erythromycin, and tetracycline and had intermediate susceptibility to levofloxacin and gatifloxacin. It was susceptible to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX), gentamicin, linezolid, vancomycin and rifampin.
Treatment and Followup
Echocardiography showed no evidence of endocarditis. Vancomycin (1.75g) every 12 hours was administered intravenously for 6 weeks. He was also diagnosed with nodular scleritis and was treated with vancomycin ophthalmic drops. He was treated then with oral TMP-SMX therapy for 2 weeks thereafter. The patient did well, with full recovery. Upon further questioning, his previous rashes had been multiple episodes of furunculosis caused by culture-positive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, which had also affected other canoe-racing teammates.
Discussion
Panton-Valentine Leukocidin positive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (PVL-MRSA) is an increasing cause of community-acquired infections. It is usually USA300 pulsed-field type [Francis et al. 2005] and in some cases it moves across tissue planes and invades anatomic structures via contiguous spread [de Bentzmann et al. 2004]. It has an aggressive phenotype, and can cause pulmonary disease, soft tissue infection, and multiple sites of infection, often with rapid progression.
Optimal antimicrobial therapy for this infection is debated, and the role of exotoxin-blocking antimicrobials (linezolid and clindamycin, if susceptible) is under investigation [Morgan 2007]. There is also debate about the role of Panton-Valentine Leukocidin (PVL) in these infections. PVL can be produced by methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) strains as well as methicillin-resistant S. aureus strains (MRSA); both are associated with severe pneumonias in young, healthy people [Gillet et al. 2008]. Some investigators have characterized PVL as a potent pore-forming leukotoxin which is sufficient to cause pneumonia and to induce transcription of staphylococcal proteins including lung inflammatory factors [Labandeira-Rey et al. 2007]. Other investigators, however, have shown that in mice infected with S. aureus , PVL is not a major virulence determinant [Voyich et al. 2006] or pathogenic factor [Wardenburg et al. 2008], although it is an epidemiologic marker of severe CA-MRSA infections. These are ongoing areas of investigation including in rabbits, whose leukocytes, like human leukocytes, are more PVL-sensitive than are those of mice [Diep et al. 2008].
Empyema necessitans results from the spontaneous dissection of infected pleural fluid into chest wall. It usually occurs after chronic untreated necrotizing pneumonia [Hockensmith et al. 1999] although in this case the process was very rapid, and required urgent surgery. Many organisms have been reported to cause empyema necessitans, including S. aureus , Streptococcus pneumoniae , anaerobes, Mycobacterium tuberculosis , and Actinomyces [Ahmed et al. 2007].
This patient had previously been healthy and active, with no apparent immunodeficiency, but a history of MRSA skin disease. The progression of disease in this case was fulminant, and rapid mobilization of surgical intervention was most likely critical to the favorable outcome. The patient’s water exposure was most likely less important than his sports-related exposure. Other members of the patient’s competitive canoeing team had had MRSA soft tissue infections in the past. MRSA transmission has been documented on sports teams [Kazakova et al. 2005].
Final Diagnosis
Rapidly progressive necrotizing Panton Valentine Leukocidin positive disseminated Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection, with nodular scleritis, cutaneous abscesses, mediastinal abscess requiring debridement, empyema requiring decortication, and multiple cavitary pulmonary lesions.
References
Ahmed, S.I., Gripaldo, R.E., and Alao, O.A. (2007). Empyema necessitans in the setting of pneumonia and parapneumonic effusion. Am J Med Sci 333, 106-108.
PMID:17301589 ( PubMed abstract )
Bubeck Wardenburg, J., Palazzolo-Ballance, A.M., Otto, M., Schneewind, O., and DeLeo, F.R. (2008). Panton-Valentine leukocidin is not a virulence determinant in murine models of community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus disease. J Infect Dis 198, 1166-1170.
PMID:18729780 ( PubMed abstract )
de Bentzmann, S., Tristan, A., Etienne, J., Brousse, N., Vandenesch, F., and Lina, G. (2004). Staphylococcus aureus isolates associated with necrotizing pneumonia bind to basement membrane type I and IV collagens and laminin. J Infect Dis 190, 1506-1515.
PMID:15378445 ( PubMed abstract )
Diep, B.A., Palazzolo-Ballance, A.M., Tattevin, P., Basuino, L., Braughton, K.R., Whitney, A.R., Chen, L., Kreiswirth, B.N., Otto, M., DeLeo, F.R., and Chambers, H.F. (2008). Contribution of Panton-Valentine leukocidin in community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus pathogenesis. PLoS One 3, e3198.
PMID:18787708 ( PubMed abstract )
Francis, J.S., Doherty, M.C., Lopatin, U., Johnston, C.P., Sinha, G., Ross, T., Cai, M., Hansel, N.N., Perl, T., Ticehurst, J.R., Carroll, K., Thomas, D.L., Nuermberger, E., and Bartlett, J.G. (2005). Severe community-onset pneumonia in healthy adults caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus carrying the Panton-Valentine leukocidin genes. Clin Infect Dis 40, 100-107.
PMID:15614698 ( PubMed abstract )
Gillet, Y., Etienne, J., Lina, G., and Vandenesch, F. (2008). Association of necrotizing pneumonia with Panton-Valentine leukocidin-producing Staphylococcus aureus, regardless of methicillin resistance. Clin Infect Dis 47, 985-986.
PMID:18778235 ( PubMed abstract )
Hockensmith, M.L., Mellman, D.L., and Aronsen, E.L. (1999). Fusobacterium nucleatum empyema necessitans. Clin Infect Dis 29, 1596-1598.
PMID:10585835 ( PubMed abstract )
Kazakova, S.V., Hageman, J.C., Matava, M., Srinivasan, A., Phelan, L., Garfinkel, B., Boo, T., McAllister, S., Anderson, J., Jensen, B., Dodson, D., Lonsway, D., McDougal, L.K., Arduino, M., Fraser, V.J., Killgore, G., Tenover, F.C., Cody, S., and Jernigan, D.B. (2005). A clone of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus among professional football players. N Engl J Med 352, 468-475.
PMID:15689585 ( PubMed abstract )
Labandeira-Rey, M., Couzon, F., Boisset, S., Brown, E.L., Bes, M., Benito, Y., Barbu, E.M., Vazquez, V., Hook, M., Etienne, J., Vandenesch, F., and Bowden, M.G. (2007). Staphylococcus aureus Panton-Valentine leukocidin causes necrotizing pneumonia. Science 315, 1130-1133.
PMID:17234914 ( PubMed abstract )
Morgan, M.S. (2007). Diagnosis and treatment of Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL)-associated staphylococcal pneumonia. Int J Antimicrob Agents 30, 289-296.
PMID:17629464 ( PubMed abstract )
Voyich, J.M., Otto, M., Mathema, B., Braughton, K.R., Whitney, A.R., Welty, D., Long, R.D., Dorward, D.W., Gardner, D.J., Lina, G., Kreiswirth, B.N., and DeLeo, F.R. (2006). Is Panton-Valentine leukocidin the major virulence determinant in community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus disease? J Infect Dis 194, 1761-1770.
PMID:17109350 ( PubMed abstract )
