History of Present Illness
IDSA 2005 Case summary: A man with increasing weakness and difficulty breathing.
A man in his eighties, native to Alaska, presented with progressive weakness and difficulty breathing at rest. One day before presentation, diarrhea and vomiting began abruptly. There was a mild headache, dry mouth, and the patient was unable to eat or drink. There were no fevers or chills.
Past Medical History
His past medical history included hypertension, degenerative arthritis, pneumonia and bladder carcinoma for which he had received chemotherapy years before.
Medications
Medications included atenolol, ibuprofen, quinine and aspirin.
Epidemiological History
The patient lived on the coast of the Bering Sea (Figure 1). There was no history of recent travel, alcohol or tobacco use. He owned dogs. The patient presented during the summer season, when many mosquitoes were in the environment.
Physical Examination
He was alert and oriented to person, place and time, with moderate respiratory distress. The temperature was normal; the pulse 56 beats per minute, and blood pressure 120/74 mm Hg supine and 96/42 mm Hg standing. There was ptosis of both eyelids, absent bowel sounds and symmetrical descending flaccid paralysis; deep tendon reflexes were normal.
Studies
The forced vital capacity was markedly decreased.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was intubated shortly after presentation. A diagnostic test was performed. Figure 1. View in Alaska.
Figure 1. View in Alaska.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Additional history became available: two days before the patient’s illness, members of the village had found a whale on the shore. According to local customs; it was shared among all people in the village with elders receiving the best part: Maktaaq, (the thick skin and thin layer of blubber of whales), a traditional delicacy in the arctic (Figures 2 and 3). Shortly after this patient became ill, several other elders presented with nausea, vomiting and weakness, some with blurred vision and diplopia. The whale was thought to have been dead for several days before it found on the shore.
Botulism was suspected, and botulism testing performed by the Center for Disease Control later returned positive for Type E.
Figure 2. View in Alaska.
Figure 3. Maktaaq (thick whale skin and blubber).
Treatment and Followup
Empiric therapy with botulism antitoxin and supportive care in intensive care unit was initiated. The patient was intubated for five days; the ileus resolved in two weeks and he was discharged to home in good health.
Discussion
Final Diagnosis
Botulism, Type E, caused by Clostridium botulinum.
References
