History of Present Illness
2008 ICAAC/IDSA Fellows' Day Case Presentation Summary: A man with HIV infection and AIDS and progressive weakness in his legs.
A man in his thirties with a history of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) developed generalized myalgias and progressive leg weakness during the previous 6 months. The weakness was greater on the right than the left, associated with a sharp pain in the left flank and mid-lower back that radiated into his thighs, and had resulted in several falls. There was also a burning sensation on the anterior aspect of the right thigh that was exacerbated by touch. He had no bowel or bladder dysfunction and no visual deficits.
During the previous year, he reported an estimated weight loss of 10-20 lbs. There was no history of fevers, chills, night sweats, nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, dysuria or rash. Pneumocystis pneumonia had been diagnosed 3 months earlier, and fatigue and a mild cough had persisted since that time.
Past Medical History
There was a history of HIV and AIDS, diagnosed more than 15 years earlier, with a recent CD4 T-lymphocyte count of 67 cells per cubic millimeter and HIV RNA level of 40,000 copies per milliliter. AIDS-defining illnesses included Pneumocystis pneumonia recently and recurrent cryptococcal meningitis several years earlier. Antiretroviral therapy had been started 9 months before admission, but non-adherence to medication had been documented. There was also a history of substance abuse in the past, including injection drug use.
Medications
Medications included trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (double strength three times weekly), azithromycin (1200 mg weekly), fluconazole (200 mg daily), acetaminophen with codeine (as needed for pain), gabapentin (300 mg daily), atazanavir (300 mg daily), ritonavir (100 mg daily), and a fixed dose combination of tenofovir and emtricitabine (300 and 200 mg daily, respectively.)
Epidemiological History
He had emigrated from Mexico to the Southwestern United States more than 15 years earlier, and worked in construction and landscaping. He had last traveled internationally 6 years before to Mexico for a visit. Five years earlier, he had been incarcerated for several weeks. He had stopped alcohol and tobacco 4 years earlier, and crack cocaine and marijuana more than 5 years before.
Physical Examination
He was thin and appeared ill. The temperature was 99°F (37.2°C), the blood pressure 100/53 mm Hg, pulse 100 beats per minute, respirations 18 breaths per minute. The calves of the lower legs were tender to touch. Strength measured 4 on a scale up to 5 in the left leg and right hip, and 3 of 5 in the lower leg on the right. Specifically, the strength in the right quadriceps and hamstring measured 4/5; right extension and flexion of lower leg, and the dorsal and plantar foot muscles, 3/5; and in the left quadriceps, hamstring, extension and flexion of lower leg, dorsal and plantar foot muscles, 5/5. Deep tendon reflexes were 1+ bilaterally, and the Babinski plantar reflex was flexor. Hyperesthesia was present over the right anterior thigh, and there was decreased sensation to vibration in the left leg.
Studies
Laboratory values included a white blood cell count of 12,200/mm³ (83% neutrophils, 13% lymphocytes, 1% eosinophils), hemoglobin 10.1 g/dL and hematocrit 32.3%. The basic metabolic panel was normal. The aspartate aminotransferase was 61 U/L (elevated) and albumin of 2.4 g/dL (low). Other metabolic test results and coagulation tests were normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 109 mm/Hr. The CD4 T-lymphocyte count was 127 cells/mm³, with an HIV RNA level of 34,955 copies/ml. Testing for Toxoplasma immunoglobulin (Ig) G was negative at 0.5 IU/mL (less than 6.4 IU/mL is negative). Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid was normal, except for slightly elevated protein of 48.8 mg/dL. Testing of the cerebrospinal fluid for syphilis (venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) test), cryptococcal antigen, and nucleic acid by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr virus, and varicella zoster virus were all negative.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine revealed expansile intramedullary enhancing lesions at the level of the T11-T12 disc space (Figures 1 and 2). MRI of head was normal.
Figure 1. MRI of the lumbosacral spine, T-1 weighted.
Figure 2. MRI of the spine, T-1 weighted, transverse view.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
On admission, a T11/12 laminectomy was performed. After the dura was opened, a thick arachnoid membrane and large tangle of blood vessels including dilated arteries and veins were observed. An arteriovenous malformation (AVM) was suspected; the wound was closed and a thoracic spinal angiogram performed, however no AVM was seen. Two weeks later, a second surgical resection was performed and hypervascularity was noted over the dorsum of the spinal cord. There was a firm, tan, avascular intramedullary mass in the spinal cord. Frozen section showed inflammation. Pathological examination of the spinal tissue is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Biopsy of the spinal cord lesion.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Pathological examination of the spinal cord tissue, stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) stain, revealed bradyzoites and tachyzoites of Toxoplasma gondii (Figure 3).
Treatment and Followup
Therapy was begun, including sulfadiazine 1000 mg every 6 hours, pyrimethamine 75 mg daily, leucovorin 20 mg daily and dexamethasone taper, as well as tenofovir-emtricitabine, atazanavir and ritonavir. He transferred to a rehabilitation facility. Ten days later, he returned to the hospital with pneumonia and complaints of progressive weakness, which involved his arms as well. Electromyelography (EMG) showed abnormal activity. A muscle biopsy was performed; hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) stain of the muscle tissue revealed necrotic skeletal muscle with lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltrate (Figures 4 and 5). Within the necrotic inflamed areas were abundant bradyzoites and tachyzoites of T. gondii.
The patient was unable to take oral medication secondary to difficulty swallowing pills. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole therapy was given intravenously. Several days later, cardiac arrest occurred. Resuscitation efforts were not successful, and the patient died.
Figure 4. H and E stain of the muscle biopsy.
Figure 5. Muscle biopsy with necrotic tissue surrounding tachyzoites.
Discussion
Extracerebral toxoplasmosis is a relatively rare manifestation of reactivation and primary disease in AIDS patients. This intracellular parasite can cause disease in almost any organ. The most common extracerebral sites include eyes, lungs, spine, heart and muscle. Dissemination is defined by two or more extracerebral sites. In areas of high seroprevalence, such as France (70%) or the United States (45%), there should be a high index of suspicion for this diagnosis. Extracerebral diagnosis is definitively made with histological evidence of tachyzoites, an indicator of active disease. Treatment consists of sulfadiazine, pyrimethamine, and folinic acid for 6 weeks after resolution of all signs and symptoms, followed by maintenance therapy until immunodeficiency resolves.
An unusual feature of this case was the negative Toxoplasma IgG antibody test. This serologic test is positive in almost all cases of cerebral toxoplasmosis, and a negative test result usually suggests that a biopsy should be pursued, as occurred in this case.
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated toxoplasmosis caused by Toxoplasma gondii in a patient with HIV infection and AIDS.
References
Gherardi, R., Baudrimont, M., Lionnet, F., Salord, J.M., Duvivier, C., Michon, C., Wolff, M., and Marche, C. (1992). Skeletal muscle toxoplasmosis in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: a clinical and pathological study. Ann Neurol 32, 535-542.
PMID:1456737(PubMed abstract) Herskovitz, S., Siegel, S.E., Schneider, A.T., Nelson, S.J., Goodrich, J.T., and Lantos, G. (1989). Spinal cord toxoplasmosis in AIDS. Neurology 39, 1552-1553.
PMID:2812340(PubMed abstract) Rabaud, C., May, T., Amiel, C., Katlama, C., Leport, C., Ambroise-Thomas, P., and Canton, P. (1994). Extracerebral toxoplasmosis in patients infected with HIV. A French National Survey. Medicine (Baltimore) 73, 306-314.
PMID:7984082(PubMed abstract) Vyas, R., and Ebright, J.R. (1996). Toxoplasmosis of the spinal cord in a patient with AIDS: case report and review. Clin Infect Dis 23, 1061-1065.
PMID:8922803(PubMed abstract)
Gherardi, R., Baudrimont, M., Lionnet, F., Salord, J.M., Duvivier, C., Michon, C., Wolff, M., and Marche, C. (1992). Skeletal muscle toxoplasmosis in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: a clinical and pathological study. Ann Neurol 32, 535-542.
PMID:1456737(PubMed abstract)
Herskovitz, S., Siegel, S.E., Schneider, A.T., Nelson, S.J., Goodrich, J.T., and Lantos, G. (1989). Spinal cord toxoplasmosis in AIDS. Neurology 39, 1552-1553.
PMID:2812340(PubMed abstract)
Rabaud, C., May, T., Amiel, C., Katlama, C., Leport, C., Ambroise-Thomas, P., and Canton, P. (1994). Extracerebral toxoplasmosis in patients infected with HIV. A French National Survey. Medicine (Baltimore) 73, 306-314.
PMID:7984082(PubMed abstract)
Vyas, R., and Ebright, J.R. (1996). Toxoplasmosis of the spinal cord in a patient with AIDS: case report and review. Clin Infect Dis 23, 1061-1065.
PMID:8922803(PubMed abstract)
