History of Present Illness
A male in his seventies presented with 5-day history of nonproductive cough, dyspnea, and fevers as high as 102.0 ºF. He also had fever, headaches, myalgias, and chills for two weeks which preceded his respiratory symptoms. Prior to onset of symptoms, patient had visited a local zoo. He was also noted to be cleaning his vehicle which he leaves outside often with the windows down.
Past Medical History
Hypertension and dyslipidemia
Medications
None
Epidemiological History
Patient denied illicit substance use, tobacco use, or any alcohol use. He resides in Southern California in the mountain wilderness. He leaves his vehicle outside with the windows down which requires him to frequently clean his dashboard and upholstery. He has no domestic pets, but his home is surrounded by rodents, deer, sheep, raccoons, and other wildlife. He denied staying in any hotels, using a hot tub, or being around any fountains. He also denied any history of recreational hunting, animal skinning, insect bites, or being around farm animals. Patient had no other travel history outside the country or known sick contacts.
Physical Examination
The patient was noted to be in mild respiratory distress. The blood pressure was 141/80 mm Hg, pulse 94 beats per minute, temperature 97.7 ºF, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation was 93% on 6 L of high-flow oxygen by nasal canula. Respiratory exam demonstrated mild rhonchi at the lung bases. The examination was otherwise normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 19.3 K/uL (reference range 3.8-10.8 K/uL), hemoglobin was 18.4 g/dL (reference range 14-18 g/dL), hematocrit was 52.6% (reference range 42.0-54.0% in men), and platelet count 102.0 K/uL (reference range 150-450 K/uL). Procalcitonin 0.219 ng/mL (reference range < 0.499 ng/mL). Manual differential was significant for atypical lymphocytes 4.8 K/uL (reference range 1.2-3.7 K/uL) and metamyelocytes 0.4 K/uL (reference range 0-0 K/uL). Basic metabolic panel and liver function tests were normal. Albumin 2.6 g/dL (3.5-5.7 g/dL). Troponins were <0.017, <0.008, and <0.008 ng/ml (reference range <0.029 ng/ml). Chlamydia pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, HIV-1/2, Q fever, and Cocciodioides serologies were negative. Streptococcus pneumoniae and Legionella pneumophila urine antigen were negative. Respiratory panel was negative (Figure 1). COVID-19 test was negative. A chest imaging demonstrated hazy ground-glass opacities in the upper and lower lobes bilaterally (Figure 2). Computed tomography of the chest demonstrated hazy ground glass densities in the lower lobes bilaterally, greatest in the superior segments, and more ground glass opacities in the upper lobes posteriorly (Figure 3). He was noted to have small bilateral effusions. Transthoracic echocardiogram was unremarkable.
Figure 1. Figure 1: Respiratory panel obtained via nasopharyngeal swab
Figure 1: Respiratory panel obtained via nasopharyngeal swab
Figure 2. Figure 2: Chest X-ray demonstrating ground-glass opacities in the upper and lower lobes consistent with pneumonia.
Figure 2: Chest X-ray demonstrating ground-glass opacities in the upper and lower lobes consistent with pneumonia.
Figure 3. Figure 3: Chest CT: Hazy ground glass densities in the lower lobes bilaterally with bilateral pleural effusions.
Figure 3: Chest CT: Hazy ground glass densities in the lower lobes bilaterally with bilateral pleural effusions.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Patient was initially admitted with diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia. He was started on azithromycin and ceftriaxone. He was initially requiring minimal supplemental oxygen, however, his respiratory status worsened requiring high flow nasal canula at 20 L with fractional inspired oxygen of 80% saturation (FiO2%) during the initial course of the hospitalization. Infectious disease and Pulmonary services were consulted for further assistance.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
CT-guided right sided thoracentesis demonstrated removal of only 100 ccs yellow colored transudative fluid. Body fluid cultures were negative. Hantavirus IgG and IgM serologies were positive.
Treatment and Followup
On day 7 of hospitalization, Hantavirus immunoglobulin IgG and IgM studies returned positive. At this point, patient’s respiratory status had significantly improved without requirement of any supplemental oxygen. Antibiotics were discontinued prior to discharge. Once the diagnosis was made, county public health department was notified. Patient was educated about Hantavirus in-regards to steps to prevent infection. Patient followed up outpatient Infectious Disease clinic 4 weeks later and had no complaints.
Discussion
Hantavirus is a negative-sense, single-stranded RNA virus in the Bunyaviridae family. Infection occurs from aerosolized excretions from infected rodents. The virus is associated with two forms of major illness which include hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HCPS) and hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) often referred to as the hantaviruses of the New and Old Worlds, respectively [1]. We present a case of HCPS in a patient who presented with rapidly progressive hypoxic respiratory failure after having exposure to rodent droppings. Our patient met the CDC clinical case definition for cardiopulmonary syndrome which consists of being febrile >38.3° Celsius, having bilateral interstitial infiltrates, and requiring oxygen within 72 hours of hospitalization. A diagnostic dilemma commonly arises when a patient with pneumonia presents from the community as the etiology is often assumed to be bacterial or a common virus. Given the chest radiographic findings which included patchy ground glass infiltrates, atypical bacterial microorganisms such as Chlamydia pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Legionella pneumophila were in the differential [2]. Given the ongoing pandemic, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was also a consideration. Our patient also resided in Western United States where Coccidioidomycosis should also be suspected in patients who present with respiratory symptoms and diffuse pneumonia findings on imaging. Given our patient’s exposure to wild animals, specifically rodents, one must also consider leptospirosis pulmonary hemorrhage syndrome and tularemia. This case reiterates the importance of taking a careful history which includes identifying animal exposure and understanding the patient’s living conditions. Rapid detection of hantavirus infections is not always possible; therefore, one must have a high index of suspicion as early diagnosis is critical to prevent respiratory deterioration.
Final Diagnosis
Hantavirus Cardiopulmonary Syndrome (HCPS)
References
Schmaljohn C, Hjelle B. Hantaviruses: a global disease problem. Emerg Infect Dis. 1997 Apr-Jun;3(2):95-104. doi: 10.3201/eid0302.970202.
PMID:9204290(PubMed abstract) Moolenaar RL, Dalton C, Lipman HB, Umland ET, Gallaher M, Duchin JS, Chapman L, Zaki SR, Ksiazek TG, Rollin PE, et al. Clinical features that differentiate hantavirus pulmonary syndrome from three other acute respiratory illnesses. Clin Infect Dis. 1995 Sep;21(3):643-9. doi: 10.1093/clinids/21.3.643.
PMID:8527558(PubMed abstract)
Schmaljohn C, Hjelle B. Hantaviruses: a global disease problem. Emerg Infect Dis. 1997 Apr-Jun;3(2):95-104. doi: 10.3201/eid0302.970202.
PMID:9204290(PubMed abstract)
Moolenaar RL, Dalton C, Lipman HB, Umland ET, Gallaher M, Duchin JS, Chapman L, Zaki SR, Ksiazek TG, Rollin PE, et al. Clinical features that differentiate hantavirus pulmonary syndrome from three other acute respiratory illnesses. Clin Infect Dis. 1995 Sep;21(3):643-9. doi: 10.1093/clinids/21.3.643.
PMID:8527558(PubMed abstract)
