History of Present Illness
2008 June Featured Case Summary: A teenager with cervical lymphadenopathy.
A 17-year old boy was seen by an otolaryngologist because of cervical lymphadenopathy on the left side
Approximately 2.5 months earlier, a lymph node in the left cervical chain developed, which was followed by a smaller satellite lesion inferiorly two weeks later. He also reported a history of headache and sinus congestion. He saw his physician and a chest radiograph and skin test for tuberculosis were reportedly negative. Empiric therapy with cefaclor was administered for presumed chronic sinusitis with an associated headache, followed by a course of amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, without improvement in the lymphadenopathy.
Weight loss of 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) occurred, attributed by the patient to anorexia associated with the antibiotics. During the month before his presentation, the patient felt feverish (but did not record his temperature) and noted an intermittent cough, body pain and fatigue. There was no history of sweats or chills. He was referred to an otolaryngologist.
Past Medical History
There was a history of migraine headaches, for which computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), including vascular studies, were performed in the past and which were reportedly normal. Skin tests for tuberculosis were reportedly negative 2.5 years and 2 months before presentation. He had had a small occipital cyst and shin splints, and 2 years earlier, left knee arthroscopy was performed for cartilage injury.
Medications
Valproic acid (1000 mg daily) had been administered for the migraine headaches.
Allergies
He had no allergies.
Epidemiological History
The patient had emigrated from India to the United States 2.5 years before, lived in the Northeast and had traveled to the Southeast. There was no recent history of air travel and his only exposure to pets was indirect, in his friends’ homes, with no cat scratches or contact with animal litter or cages. He was a vegetarian and did not smoke cigarettes or abuse alcohol. There were no known exposures to individuals with pulmonary tuberculosis. A sibling was healthy.
Physical Examination
He appeared well. Multiple well-defined, ballotable, soft lesions, up to 2 cm in diameter, were present in the left cervical region and consistent with lymph nodes. The remainder of the otolaryngologic examination, including voice, ears, nose and anterior nasal mucosa, oral cavity and oropharynx, buccal membranes, floor of mouth, and lips, were normal. Flexible fiberoptic examination was performed, under local anesthesia because of gagging, and the nasal cavity and nasopharyngeal mucosa, base of tongue, vallecula, and epiglottis were clear. The larynx demonstrated normal laryngeal anatomy and mobility. A remnant adenoid was present and noted to be within normal limits for his age. The parotid and thyroid beds were clear bilaterally and his cranial nerves were completely intact.
Studies
Computed tomography of the neck demonstrated extensive lymphadenopathy of the left posterior cervical chain with 2 additional enlarged nodes superficially. There was central cavitation of the nodes, asymmetrical prominence of the left tonsil, and no calcification or soft tissue stranding (Figure 1).
Figure 1. CT scan of the neck.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A fine needle aspiration of one of the lymph nodes was obtained. Pathological examination of the lymph node tissue demonstrated necrotic cellular tissue fragments, which were thought to be consistent with an origin from granulomatous lymphadenopathy. No fungus, yeast, or acid-fast bacilli were observed. Chest radiographs, shown in Figures 2 and 3, revealed a linear density (2 mm) in the right mid lung (possibly a minute granuloma) and a patchy opacity (17 mm) overlying the right lower lung, which was thought to possibly represent overlap of a rib and vessel or mild atelectasis. There was no well-defined consolidation or pleural effusion.
Figure 2. Chest radiograph.
Figure 3. Chest radiograph, lateral view.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A skin test for tuberculosis was repeated and demonstrated 40 millimeters (mm) by 60 mm induration, with greater than 10 mm central vesiculation and ulceration.
The enlarged necrotic lymph nodes located superiorly were excised. Pathological examination of the tissue (Figure 4) revealed necrotizing granulomas and multinucleated giant cells (see arrow), and genetic probe testing confirmed the presence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Culture of the lymph node tissue obtained by fine needle aspiration eventually grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis, shown in Figure 5, which was sensitive to all antituberculous drugs tested.
Figure 4. H and E stain of excised lymph node.
Figure 5. Acid-fast stain of growth from fine needle aspiration.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was referred to a Pediatric Infectious Disease specialist. On further questioning, after the diagnosis was known, it was learned that six years earlier, his mother was treated in India for Pott's disease of the lumbar spine (L3-4), for 18 months with multiple drug therapy (isoniazid, rifampin and pyrazinamide).
After Mycobacterium tuberculosis was identified, isoniazid (300 mg), rifampin (600 mg), ethambutol (1000 mg) and pyrazinamide (1500 mg) were initially administered daily with pyridoxine (50 mg), and topical steroid cream was applied to the skin test site. Abstinence from alcohol during the course of his therapy was advised. Results of tests of liver function were normal while on anti-tuberculous therapy.
When the results of sensitivity testing were known after 5 weeks, ethambutol was discontinued, and pyrazinamide was stopped after 2 months. After 6 months of therapy, CT scanning demonstrated diminution in the size of all residual cervical nodes, and minimal and mostly punctate calcified caseous material in the center of one of the nodes. Rifampin and isoniazid were stopped after 9 months of treatment.
Discussion
The subacute development of cervical lymphadenopathy (scrofula), appearing unilaterally in this recent immigrant from Asia, strongly suggested a clinical diagnosis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis lymphadenitis. Tuberculous lymphadenitis is the most common form of extrapulmonary tuberculosis, and the cervical nodes are those most often affected.
Mononucleosis and streptococcal pharyngitis are more likely to present as acute illnesses with bilateral lymphadenopathy, although asymmetrical involvement can be seen. The presence of necrosis on pathological examination of the lymph node tissue made the diagnosis of lymphoma, in the absence of previous chemotherapy, unlikely. Other infectious agents, such as Bartonella henselae, atypical Mycobacteria and Toxoplasma, can also cause lymphadenitis. In this patient, there was not a history of significant pet exposure to strongly support the diagnosis of Bartonella infection. In the United States, mycobacterial lymphadenitis is more often caused by atypical mycobacteria than by M. tuberculosis (M.tb.), though selected populations, such as Latinos, Native Americans and immigrants from Asia and Haiti, experience higher rates of M.tb.than that seen in the general population. A tissue diagnosis, with culture and sensitivities, was needed to identify the causative agent and, in this time of increasing multi-drug resistant organisms, the appropriate therapy.
The “cording” morphology of the organisms grown in liquid media, such as that seen in Figure 5, is more typical of M. tuberculosis than other types of mycobacteria. Although other mycobacteria, such as M. kansasii and some of the rapid growers, may also cord, they tend toward a looser, less-organized pattern referred to as "pseudo-cording". The presence of the cording morphology may help guide subsequent genetic probe testing for speciation of the organism.
It is not certain why the initial screening Mantoux skin test for tuberculosis exposure was reportedly negative in this patient. Difficulties with this test may arise from the quality of the purified protein derivative (PPD) solution itself and whether it has been stored properly, the correct placement of the PPD solution intradermally, the timing and procedure for reading the area of induration, and the correct interpretation of the significance of the physical findings, which vary depending on the exposure risk of the individual being tested. In elderly or immunocompromised individuals, who may be anergic, false negatives may occur. When exposure to tuberculosis is highly suspect, repeating the test in 1- 3 weeks may be helpful. The development of additional options to determine exposure to tuberculosis, such as an in-vitro interferon-gamma release assay, may provide benefit when questions arise.
Final Diagnosis
Cervical lymphadenopathy (scrofula) caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
References
Jawahar, M.S. (2000). Scrofula revisited: an update on the diagnosis and management of tuberculosis of superficial lymph nodes. Indian J Pediatr 67, S28-33.
PMID:11129904(PubMed abstract) Leung, A.K., and Robson, W.L. (2004). Childhood cervical lymphadenopathy. J Pediatr Health Care 18, 3-7
PMID:14722499(PubMed abstract) Marais, B.J., Wright, C.A., Schaaf, H.S., Gie, R.P., Hesseling, A.C., Enarson, D.A., and Beyers, N. (2006). Tuberculous lymphadenitis as a cause of persistent cervical lymphadenopathy in children from a tuberculosis-endemic area. Pediatr Infect Dis J 25, 142-146
PMID:16462291(PubMed abstract) Mazurek, G.H., Jereb, J., Lobue, P., Iademarco, M.F., Metchock, B., and Vernon, A. (2005). Guidelines for using the QuantiFERON-TB Gold test for detecting Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, United States. MMWR Recomm Rep 54, 49-55.
PMID:16357824(PubMed abstract) Pasternack MS and Swartz MN, Chapter 80, Lymphadenitis and Lymphangitis, Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Ed., pages 1206-1207. Elsevier, Churchill and Livingstone.
Jawahar, M.S. (2000). Scrofula revisited: an update on the diagnosis and management of tuberculosis of superficial lymph nodes. Indian J Pediatr 67, S28-33.
PMID:11129904(PubMed abstract)
Leung, A.K., and Robson, W.L. (2004). Childhood cervical lymphadenopathy. J Pediatr Health Care 18, 3-7
PMID:14722499(PubMed abstract)
Marais, B.J., Wright, C.A., Schaaf, H.S., Gie, R.P., Hesseling, A.C., Enarson, D.A., and Beyers, N. (2006). Tuberculous lymphadenitis as a cause of persistent cervical lymphadenopathy in children from a tuberculosis-endemic area. Pediatr Infect Dis J 25, 142-146
PMID:16462291(PubMed abstract)
Mazurek, G.H., Jereb, J., Lobue, P., Iademarco, M.F., Metchock, B., and Vernon, A. (2005). Guidelines for using the QuantiFERON-TB Gold test for detecting Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, United States. MMWR Recomm Rep 54, 49-55.
PMID:16357824(PubMed abstract)
Pasternack MS and Swartz MN, Chapter 80, Lymphadenitis and Lymphangitis, Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Ed., pages 1206-1207. Elsevier, Churchill and Livingstone.
