History of Present Illness
A woman in her forties, recently diagnosed with HIV, AIDS and cutaneous Kaposi sarcoma, was admitted to a hospital because of progressive dyspnea.
Three weeks earlier, the patient had been admitted to the same hospital because of dyspnea and fevers. On that admission, she reported no active medications. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest demonstrated bilateral pulmonary infiltrates and pleural effusions (Figure 1). HIV testing was positive, and diagnostic evaluation revealed no other evidence of bacterial, viral, or fungal causes of pneumonia. Bronchoscopic examination revealed scattered erythematous lesions throughout the tracheobronchial tree, which were suspicious for Kaposi sarcoma. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was begun for Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis.
Later, during the same admission, the patient revealed she had been diagnosed with AIDS and Kaposi sarcoma (with positive cutaneous and lymph node biopsies) eight weeks earlier at a different hospital (hospital #1). At that time, she had started taking antiretroviral therapy (tenofovir-emtricitabine-efavirenz). During her hospitalization at the second hospital (hospital #2), the antiretroviral therapy had been stopped (because her HIV history was not initially revealed) and it was noted that her symptoms had rapidly improved.
Repeat chest CT performed at hospital #2 ten days after the initial imaging (Figure 2) demonstrated significant improvement in the bilateral pulmonary infiltrates and effusions.
The patient developed neutropenia, which was attributed to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was stopped, and inhaled pentamidine was administered as alternative prophylaxis. The patient was discharged home off all antiretroviral therapy with a presumptive diagnosis of pulmonary Kaposi sarcoma immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), with plans for close outpatient follow-up with infectious diseases and oncology.
Within the two weeks after discharge, her dyspnea gradually worsened, with no other new symptoms. She was readmitted to the hospital for further management.
Figure 1. Initial CT of the chest.
Figure 2. CT of the chest, ten days later, after stopping antiretroviral therapy.
Past Medical History
As noted in the above history.
Medications
None.
Social History
She worked as a housekeeper.
Epidemiological History
The patient was born in Liberia and had moved to the U.S. Midwest seven years earlier. She reported no recent travel, animal exposure, use of illicit drugs, or any new sexual contacts.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared acutely ill. The temperature was 38.4°C (101.1°F), blood pressure 99/54 mm Hg, pulse 86 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation 91% while breathing 6 liters per minute oxygen by nasal cannula. There was marked bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy, no air movement in the lung bases bilaterally and rales in the mid-lung fields. There were pre-tibial darkened plaques consistent with cutaneous Kaposi sarcoma.
Studies
The white cell count was 2230 cells per cubic millimeter (reference range (ref) 3700 - 11,000), absolute neutrophil count 970 cells per cubic millimeter (ref 1450 - 7500), hemoglobin 9.5 g/dL (ref 11.5 - 15.5), platelets 123,000 per cubic millimeter (ref 150,000 - 400,000), serum creatinine 0.79 mg/dL (ref 0.70 - 1.40), and albumin 2.0 g/dL (ref 3.5-5). The level of CD4 T-lymphocytes was 61 cells per cubic millimeter.
A chest radiograph demonstrated increased consolidations in both lower lobes and the right middle lobe. Chest CT demonstrated multifocal diffuse lymphadenopathy, bilateral pleural effusions, and dense bilateral consolidative airspace opacities, which had progressed compared to the interim chest CT (Figure 3).
Figure 3. CT of the chest, on admission.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was admitted to the hospital. Within 36 hours of admission, oxygenation worsened and she was transferred to the medical intensive care unit and the trachea was intubated. Empiric antibiotics for hospital-acquired pneumonia were administered (initially vancomycin, piperacillin-tazobactam, and azithromycin) and empiric oseltamivir and intravenous ganciclovir were given for possible viral processes (such as influenza and cytomegalovirus respectively). However, the patient's condition worsened, with increasing oxygen requirements (up to 100% FiO2 and 15 of PEEP on the ventilator) and persistently high fevers to 40.0°C (104°F). Combination antiretroviral therapy (ART) (tenofovir, emtricitabine, and lopinavir/ritonavir) was begun again on the fourth hospital day.
A lymph node biopsy or bone marrow biopsy was considered for further evaluation but deferred as the patient’s respiratory status remained too tenuous. The patient developed progressive anemia, thrombocytopenia, and severe hypoalbuminemia during the course of the hospitalization.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Repeated bacterial cultures for blood, urine, and sputum did not demonstrate growth. A respiratory viral PCR panel (that included testing for influenza, parainfluenza, and adenovirus, among other tests) was negative. Bronchoscopic examination on the fourth hospital day demonstrated erythematous lesions spread throughout the tracheobronchial tree consistent with Kaposi sarcoma (Figure 4).
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) studies, including Legionella PCR, Pneumocystis jiroveci PCR, and bacterial, fungal, and viral cultures, were negative. Serologic testing for fungi was negative. Thoracentesis was completed on the eighth hospital day. Analysis of the pleural fluid confirmed an exudative effusion; cultures for bacteria, acid-fast bacilli, and fungi were negative, as was a cytological examination. The serum level of HHV-8 nucleic acid was 1287 copies/mL (reference range (ref) <100), C-reactive protein was 6.7 mg/dL (ref 0.0 - 1.0) and interleukin-6 was 23 pg/mL (ref <= 5).
Figure 4. Bronchoscopic examination of the tracheobronchial tree.
Treatment and Followup
Based on the results of her initial testing and the fact that her previous lymph node biopsy did not show evidence of multicentric Castleman’s disease, the patient was started on empiric treatment for Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus associated Inflammatory Cytokine Syndrome (KICS) on the tenth hospital day. Treatment included high-dose zidovudine (600 mg every 6 hours), ganciclovir (340 mg every 12 hours), and dexamethasone (2 mg every 6 hours) (all intravenously), and the ART was continued. Her fevers rapidly resolved and supplemental oxygen requirements decreased from 100% fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) to 60% FiO2 within 48 hours. Thoracic surgery was then able to obtain an axillary lymph node biopsy. Pathological examination demonstrated Kaposi sarcoma (Figure 5 and Figure 6); no evidence of lymphoma was found.
On hospital day 16, the trachea was extubated, and the patient was transferred to the regular nursing floor the following day. She was discharged home on hospital day 27, without oxygen supplementation and with resolution of her cytopenias and hypoalbuminemia.
Figure 5. Biopsy of lymph node (hematoxylin and eosin stain, 40x magnification), with abnormal spindle cell and vascular proliferation of bland ovoid cells.
Figure 6. Biopsy of the lymph node, with staining for HHV-8.
Discussion
Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV or HHV-8) associated Inflammatory Cytokine Syndrome (KICS), first described in 2010 [Uldrick et al. 2010], is a severe systemic syndrome seen in patients co-infected with HIV and KSHV. Patients with KICS have elevated levels of KSHV vIL-6, IL-6, and KSHV viral loads but do not have evidence for multicentric Castleman’s disease (MCD).
Clinical manifestations of the syndrome include fevers, wasting, hypoalbuminemia, cytopenias, respiratory symptoms, edema, lymphadenopathy, and body cavity effusions. A working case definition was proposed in 2012 [Polizzotto et al. 2012] with diagnosis based on clinical manifestations (including symptoms, laboratory abnormalities, and radiographic findings), evidence of systemic inflammation (CRP > 3 g/dL), elevated KSHV levels (>100 copies per 100,000,000 cells), and exclusion of MCD via pathological examination of lymph node, bone marrow, or spleen.
Little is known about the natural history of KICS. In the first case series with six patients, it was associated with 50% mortality. It is hypothesized that the syndrome may be associated with worsening of KS after initiation of ART (as was the case with this patient). Unfortunately, based on a limited number of cases, it appears that the underlying Kaposi sarcoma in patients with KICS may be less responsive to oncologic therapy than in KS alone as spindle cell proliferation is thought to be driven by the excess cytokine production that accompanies KICS. There is no standard therapy for KICS. In vitro studies have demonstrated that ganciclovir and zidovudine have synergistic activity against cells with activated KSHV. This therapy has been utilized in patients with KSHV related clinical syndromes (MCD, primary effusion lymphomas, and KICS).
Final Diagnosis
Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus-associated Inflammatory Cytokine Syndrome (KICS) in a patient with visceral Kaposi sarcoma and AIDS.
References
Davis DA, Singer KE, Reynolds JP, Haque M, and Yarchoan R. (2007)Hypoxia enhances the phosphorylation and cytotoxicity of ganciclovir and zidovudine in Kaposi’s sarcoma associated herpes virus infected cells. Cancer Research. 2007; 67: 7003-7010.
PMID:17638913(PubMed abstract) Letang E, Lewis JJ, Bower M, Mosam A, Borok M, Campbell TB, Naniche D, Newsom-Davis T, Shaik F, Fiorillo S, Miro JM, Schellenberg D, Easterbrook PJ. (2013) Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome associated with Kaposi sarcoma: higher incidence and mortality in Africa than in the UK. AIDS, 2013; 27: 1603-13
PMID:23462220(PubMed abstract) Polizzotto MN, Uldrick TS, Hu D, and Yarchoan R. (2012) Clinical manifestations of Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus lytic activation: multicentric Castleman disease (KSHV–MCD) and the KSHV inflammatory cytokine syndrome. Frontiers in Microbiology, 2012; 3: 73.
PMID:22403576(PubMed abstract) Uldrick TS, Wang V, O’Mahony D, Aleman K, Wyvill K, Marshall V, Steinberg S, Pittaluga S, Maric I, Whitby D, Tosato G, Little RF, and Yarchoan R. (2010) An Interleukin-6–Related Systemic Inflammatory Syndrome in Patients Co-Infected with Kaposi Sarcoma–Associated Herpesvirus and HIV but without Multicentric Castleman Disease. Clin Infect Dis, 2010; 51:350-8.
PMID:20583924(PubMed abstract)
Davis DA, Singer KE, Reynolds JP, Haque M, and Yarchoan R. (2007)Hypoxia enhances the phosphorylation and cytotoxicity of ganciclovir and zidovudine in Kaposi’s sarcoma associated herpes virus infected cells. Cancer Research. 2007; 67: 7003-7010.
PMID:17638913(PubMed abstract)
Letang E, Lewis JJ, Bower M, Mosam A, Borok M, Campbell TB, Naniche D, Newsom-Davis T, Shaik F, Fiorillo S, Miro JM, Schellenberg D, Easterbrook PJ. (2013) Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome associated with Kaposi sarcoma: higher incidence and mortality in Africa than in the UK. AIDS, 2013; 27: 1603-13
PMID:23462220(PubMed abstract)
Polizzotto MN, Uldrick TS, Hu D, and Yarchoan R. (2012) Clinical manifestations of Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus lytic activation: multicentric Castleman disease (KSHV–MCD) and the KSHV inflammatory cytokine syndrome. Frontiers in Microbiology, 2012; 3: 73.
PMID:22403576(PubMed abstract)
Uldrick TS, Wang V, O’Mahony D, Aleman K, Wyvill K, Marshall V, Steinberg S, Pittaluga S, Maric I, Whitby D, Tosato G, Little RF, and Yarchoan R. (2010) An Interleukin-6–Related Systemic Inflammatory Syndrome in Patients Co-Infected with Kaposi Sarcoma–Associated Herpesvirus and HIV but without Multicentric Castleman Disease. Clin Infect Dis, 2010; 51:350-8.
PMID:20583924(PubMed abstract)
