History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Case Submission and Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A middle-aged woman (Age, gender and race may provide important clues to the diagnosis.) with fever, dyspnea and dry cough for ten days.
A middle-aged woman on immunosuppressive medications had been well until ten days before her presentation (Patients usually remember very well the last time or day they felt well. It is therefore useful to ask for this timepoint in order to clarify the duration of symptoms, which may influence the differential diagnosis.) when she developed a dry cough (Determining whether a cough is dry or productive and, if productive, the color of the sputum and whether or not blood is present may suggest different disease etiologies. Viral and atypical bacterial chest infections are thought to be more likely cause a dry cough.) and temperature s to greater than 101.5°F (38.6°C) daily (The degree of temperature elevation may not necessarily correspond to the severity of illness. Fever pattern may be an important clue to certain illnesses such as Plasmodium malariae, which classically (although infrequently) causes fever every third day.). During the week before admission, she had been visiting friends on an island in the United States Northeast (Some infections are endemic in a particular geographical location. For example, babesiosis is highly prevalent on the island of Martha’s Vineyard, off the coast of Massachusetts, but far less common in much of the rest of the country.); she reported no insect bites (Certain insects may transmit organisms that cause specific diseases, and therefore a history of insect-bites may narrow down the list of differential diagnoses.). She had not traveled to any other areas out of her urban community in the year before admission (The timeline in relation to the travel history is very important as some infections have early and late stages of symptomatology. Infections may also reactivate or recur.).
She reported occasional chills and night sweats (Night sweats, although a very non-specific symptom, usually occur in very specific subacute-to-chronic diseases, including tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, lymphoma, and fungal infections.), without rigors, headache, abdominal pain, diarrhea, dysuria, arthralgias, myalgias or rash. A five-day course of ciprofloxacin (History of antibiotic use in the recent past influences both the diagnosis and choice of future antibiotic. Knowing a particular antibiotic has not improved the clinical condition may help exclude certain infections from the differential. Recent antibiotic use may also predispose one to infections, such as Clostridium difficile. Moreover, administering a second course of the same antibiotic may not be effective due to the possibility that resistance may have developed.) was completed on the day of presentation, without improvement. She experienced progressively worsening dyspnea walking short distances and complained of diffuse chest soreness.
Past Medical History
Weber-Christian panniculitis (A disease in which the fat tissue gets inflamed and causes skin nodules, fever, arthralgias and myalgias.) had been diagnosed five years earlier. Extensive debridement of skin wounds had been performed. The patient was treated with high doses of corticosteroids, but these had been discontinued four years earlier. She had been maintained on azathioprine (Medications that suppress the immune system predispose patients to developing opportunistic infections or serious manifestations of common infections. Opportunistic infections are caused by organisms that rarely cause disease in a host with a normally functioning immune system.) (200 mg daily) for the previous four years. During this time, she suffered no infectious complications (If there is a history of a particular infection, the patient may be prone to develop recurrences or reactivation of the same disease. Reactivation of an infection means that once infected, the organism stays latent in the body until a physical insult or stress allows it to manifest clinically. Recurrence means once infected, the host is completely cured by natural defenses or medications and then is re-infected with the same organism.). She had received a blood transfusion five years earlier (Blood transfusions have been associated with the transmission of chronic infections such as Hepatitis C virus, although the current rigorous screening and testing procedures presently make this highly unlikely in the United States and other developed countries where the testing is available.), but none before that. A tuberculosis skin test (PPD) was negative five years before (A negative PPD test suggests no previous exposure to Mycobacterium tuberculosis; however, in an immunosuppresed patient with anergy or the inability to mount a skin reaction, a negative test may be seen despite a history of previous exposure.) admission.
Medications
She was taking azathioprine (Medications that suppress the immune system predispose patients to developing opportunistic infections or serious manifestations of common infections. Opportunistic infections are caused by organisms that rarely cause disease in a host with a normally functioning immune system.) (200 mg/daily) and ciprofloxacin (500 mg/daily for five days).
Physical Examination
The patient was anxious and appeared ill (It is very important to determine if the patient looks unwell or toxic, as that may indicate the need for broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy, and aggressive supportive measures.). The temperature (Normal range: approximately 97-99°F.) was 102.5°F (39.2°C), blood pressure (Normal range: 100-120 systolic and 60-80 diastolic) 110/60 mm Hg, pulse 110 beats per minute (Normal: Heart rates can vary widely, but in general a heart rate over 100 would be considered tachycardia.) and respirations (Normal range: 12-20 breaths per minute) 35/minute. A pulse oximeter (Normal range: 95-100% while breathing ambient air) reading on ambient air was 88%, which improved to 94% when the patient’s breathing was supplemented with a 50% face mask (In summary, this patient looks ill, has a fever, tachycardia, preserved blood pressure, tachypnea - or rapid breathing - and a low oxygen saturation despite supplemental oxygen. Examination of the lungs and evaluation for a source of infection should occur. Rapid respirations and an inability to maintain normal oxygen saturation most likely suggests the disease involves the lungs diffusely; however, a similar picture may be seen with cardiac involvement or anemia. Close monitoring for further worsening of her oxygenation or hypotension should occur, as the patient may need medications or procedures such as tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation to support her vital organ functions.). The conjunctivae were anicteric (Yellowing of the conjunctivae and mucous membranes may be present in some infections such as viral hepatitis.). The oropharynx was without ulcers or thrush (Thrush is an opportunistic yeast infection. Presence of thrush may provide a clue to the patient being immunosuppressed and should make one suspicious for the possibility of other opportunistic infections. Oral ulcers may be seen in infections such as those caused by herpes simplex virus or in systemic illnesses inlcuding vasculitides and autoimmune diseases.). The chest had rales (Rales or crackles are abnormal lung sounds usually caused by explosive opening of the small airways, and can be heard in some cases of pneumonia, heart failure, or pulmonary fibrosis. Bilateral abnormal lung sounds may indicate diffuse lung involvement.) at the bases. The cardiac exam revealed tachycardia and a soft systolic murmur at the left upper sternum, without radiation (A heart murmur is a sound produced as blood flows through the cardiac chambers and large blood vessels associated with the heart during the cardiac cycle of contraction and relaxation. Some murmurs are benign or harmless and represent an incidental finding rather than a serious condition. A benign murmur is not associated with any significant underlying abnormality of the heart or its vessels. Many young people may have benign flow murmurs with normal cardiac structure and function. A pathologic heart murmur is one associated with a structural or functional abnormality of the heart.). The remainder of the examination was normal (Negative findings on examination may be as helpful as positive findings in formulating a differential diagnosis.).
Studies
The white blood cell count (The normal range may vary from one institution to another, but is often in the range of 5000-11000 cells per cubic millimeter. The combination of an ill-appearing patient with a high fever and a low white cell count is of concern, raising the possibility of a non-bacterial process that may not be responsive to empiric antibiotics or a fulminant infection, in which WBC’s are consumed more quickly than they can be replaced in the circulation. A white cell differential counts the different varieties of WBCs, including the number of immature neutrophils, also known as band forms.) (WBC) was 3,800 cells/mm³ (absolute neutrophil count 2500 cells/mm³). The hemoglobin was normal and the platelet count was 140,000 cells/mm³. The level of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 60 U/liter, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 80 U/liter and lactate dehydrogenase (This level of LDH is markedly raised, as a normal range is generally around 110-210 units per liter. An elevated LDH may occur in diseases affecting the heart, skeletal muscle, lungs and liver, and may also be raised in certain infections such as Pneumocystis jiroveci.) (LDH) was 1500 U/liter. The creatinine (Establishing the level of renal function may contribute to identifying the diagnosis, as well as determine whether or not medications excreted through the urine can be administered and, if given, at what dose and frequency.) was normal. Examination of a smear of the peripheral blood showed no schistocytes and no evidence of malaria, Ehrlichia or Babesia. A chest radiograph is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was treated with ceftriaxone, doxycycline, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and methylprednisolone (Broad-spectrum antibiotics and steroids were administered to target common bacterial pathogens as well as opportunistic infections, such as Pneumocystis jiroveci.), and azathioprine was discontinued. A urine sample was assayed for Legionella (Legionella infections primarily affect the lungs, but gastrointestinal symptoms and elevated liver enzymes can also be seen.) antigen; a serum test for cryptococcal antigen (Cryptococcal infection is an opportunistic infection that should be considered when a patient is immunosuppressed.) was sent, and an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV infection predisposes patients to develop opportunistic infections or severe manifestations of common infections.) (HIV) was performed.
Respiratory failure developed. On the second hospital day, mechanical ventilation (Mechanical ventilation is required in extreme cases, such as this seriously ill patient.) was begun and bronchoalveolar lavage (Bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage offer not only the advantage of direct visualization of the bronchial tree but also the opportunity to obtain a deeper and less contaminated sample of secretions.) (BAL) procedure was performed. A BAL fluid specimen showed few white cells; no bacterial pathogens were seen, including Pneumocystis or acid-fast organisms. A test for cytomegalovirus (CMV) antigen and culture were positive and a fungal culture grew Aspergillus fumigatus. Amphotericin B was administered and the other medications were continued (Antimicrobial therapy can be modified and narrowed once the specific pathogen and the antimicrobial sensitivities identified. Important distinctions may be identified by specimen staining, including the Gram or silver stains, and may help guide therapy before culture results, which may day days to become positive, are available.).
The patient’s clinical course was (If a particular medication is not working, the clinical condition may worsen. In cases such as this, antimicrobial resistance should be considered and a biopsy may be indicated in order to obtain a more definitive diagnosis.) complicated by renal failure, increasing oxygen requirements and the need for vasopressors. Caspofungin was added, and on the 5th hospital day, thoracotomy with a biopsy of lung tissue from the lingula was performed (Figures 2a and 2b).
Figure 2. Biopsy result.
Figure 3. Detail of Figure 2.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Blood cultures remained without growth. Testing for HIV antibodies and cryptococcal antigen in the serum, and Legionella antigen in the urine were negative. The lung biopsy stains revealed minimal fibrosis, lymphocytic cell infiltration and hyaline membrane formation. No invasive fungal disease was seen. Special stains showed no microorganisms. The patient developed multisystem organ failure and died on the 11th hospital day. A post-mortem examination was performed. Examination of the trachea and bronchi showed diffuse white patches. The pleural surface was nodular and the lung parenchyma had diffuse patchy nodules (0.2-0.5 cm) with hyperemic borders (Figures 3 and 4).
Histology of the lung showed microabscesses with Aspergillus (Figure 5). These can be seen under higher power in Figures 6 and 7. Both hematoxylin and eosin stains and giemsa stains showed evidence of Aspergillus invading and destroying blood vessels (Figure 8).
Of note, the site of the lung biopsy had few of these nodular lesions. No other examined organ had Aspergillus. Culture of the lung tissue biopsied via thoracotomy ultimately grew Aspergillus fumigatus.
Figure 4. Post-mortem appearance of lungs.
Figure 5. Lung nodules.
Figure 6. Microabscess containing Aspergillus hyphae.
Figure 7. Microabscess, at higher magnification.
Figure 8. Giemsa stain showing Aspergillus.
Figure 9. Destruction of blood vessels in lung tissue.
Treatment and Followup
Discussion
Aspergillus is a soil-dwelling, filamentous fungus that is principally acquired by inhalation of airborne spores. Because of their size (2-3 µm), the spores readily reach the terminal alveoli and germinate into hyphae. Hyphae invade lung parenchyma, resulting in thrombosis and bleeding.
The majority of disease from Aspergillus occurs in patients with prolonged neutropenia, dysfunctional neutrophils, extensive corticosteroid therapy, advanced AIDS, cytotoxic therapy, and in recipients of bone marrow or solid-organ transplants [Denning and Stevens 1990]. Rarely, disease with Aspergillus occurs in patients who lack a clear immunocompromising condition [Karam and Griffin 1986].
Most patients with invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) ultimately complain of fever, dyspnea and productive cough. Many patients suffer from chest pain (often pleuritic) and hemoptysis. In its earliest stages however, as many as one-third of patients lack these symptoms, underscoring the importance of maintaining a high index of suspicion for the illness [Denning 1998].
Diagnosing IPA relies upon clinical data as well as histological and microbiological studies. Findings on chest radiograph are usually abnormal but are nonspecific for IPA. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest may show multiple nodules, sometimes with cavitation. Diffuse lower lobe infiltrates are sometimes seen. Presence of the halo and air-crescent sign is a helpful finding and pleural effusions are rare [Denning 1998, Soubani and Chandrasekar 2002].
The likelihood of IPA can be rated as definite, probable or possible [Yu et al 1986, Horvath and Dummer 1996]. A definite diagnosis requires the presence of hyphae invading blood vessels, or positive culture from tissue. Probable IPA is based upon an appropriate clinical setting with positive cultures of Aspergillus from sputum, or fluid from bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). It is not uncommon to be colonized with Aspergillus without having active invasive disease [Perfect et al 2001]. However, patients with leukemia, prolonged neutropenia, and recipients of bone marrow transplants who have fever, pulmonary symptoms, and Aspergillus in sputum, have a very high likelihood of having IPA [Yu et al 1986, Horvath and Dummer 1996, Perfect et al 2001].
A unique aspect of this case is that the patient did not have classic risk factors for developing IPA. Indeed, she had been taking azathioprine for several years. However, by itself, this drug has not been implicated as a risk for IPA in the absence of neutropenia [Singh et al 1989, Anderson et al 1993]. Presumably, azathioprine impaired the function of her neutrophils.
The presence of CMV obtained from the BAL fluid is of unclear significance in this case. CMV shedding is common and its presence does not necessarily imply active pneumonitis. However, in certain patients (primarily recipients of transplants), the presence of CMV is associated with disease from Aspergillus [Fortun et al 2002]. It is uncertain what role anti-CMV therapy would have played for this patient.
Successful treatment of IPA is dependent upon administering prompt and effective anti-fungal therapy and reversing the underlying immunocompromising state [Patterson et al 2000, Pound et al 2002].
In conclusion, this woman died of overwhelming invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Despite the paucity of reports linking IPA and azathioprine use, the diagnosis must be considered in patients with pulmonary symptoms who take this medication. Furthermore, although open lung biopsy is important in diagnosing IPA, it does not have 100% sensitivity, and therefore clinical suspicion should guide appropriate empiric therapy.
Additional discussion points for students:
1) The state of immunocompetence or immunocompromise is one of the critical branch points in infectious diseases diagnosis. Immunocompromised patients may develop more fulminant disease, are vulnerable to a wider spectrum of pathogens, may fail to show typical inflammatory signs, may present with multiple simultaneous infections, and may be unable to clear infections even with appropriate therapy. As more and more patients are treated with immunosuppressive medicines, it becomes ever more important to be alert to these differences.
2) In general, immunocompromised patients who are severely ill require a lower threshold for empiric therapy, broader initial empiric therapy, and a quicker tempo to proceed to definitive tissue diagnosis with biopsy of affected tissues.
3) Another key distinction of which to be aware is that between a positive test (for example by culture) for a pathogen and proof of which pathogens are actually causing the disease. This patient had positive cultures both for CMV and Aspergillus, both of which can cause severe pulmonary disease in immunocompromised patients but both of which can be mere bystanders, surface colonizers in the case of fungi like Aspergillus, and secondary reactivation when the host is under stress for Herpesviruses like CMV. Proof can be challenging, but in general, the idea is to look for signs of invasive disease. Increasingly, clinicians are using serum measurement of fungal biomolecules, such as Aspergillus galactomannan, to help make this distinction.
4) A general principle of infectious diseases is that for immunocompetent hosts, the vast majority of microbial species usually do not cause significant clinical disease. Rather, immunocompetent hosts typically get sick from the small subset of pathogens possessing highly evolved virulence factors that allow them to evade and thwart host immune defenses, both intrinsic and adaptive. In contrast, immunocompromised hosts become vulnerable to many microbes that are ubiquitous in the environment but not virulent in the absence of immune suppression. Soil fungi like Aspergillus fall into this category. There are intermediate cases where weakly virulent pathogens can become highly virulent when host immune response is weakened. CMV is an example of this phenomenon.
Final Diagnosis
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis with Aspergillus fumigatus.
References
Anderson, R.J., Schafer, L.A., Olin, D.B., and Eickhoff, T.C. (1973). Infectious risk factors in the immunosuppressed host. Am J Med 54, 453-460.
PMID:4572173(PubMed abstract) Denning, D.W. (1998). Invasive aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis 26, 781-803; quiz 804-785.
PMID:9564455(PubMed abstract) Denning, D.W., and Stevens, D.A. (1990). Antifungal and surgical treatment of invasive aspergillosis: review of 2,121 published cases. Rev Infect Dis 12, 1147-1201.
PMID:2267490(PubMed abstract) Fortun, J., Martin-Davila, P., Moreno, S., De Vicente, E., Nuno, J., Candelas, A., Barcena, R., and Garcia, M. (2002). Risk factors for invasive aspergillosis in liver transplant recipients. Liver Transpl 8, 1065-1070.
PMID:12424722(PubMed abstract) Horvath, J.A., and Dummer, S. (1996). The use of respiratory-tract cultures in the diagnosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Am J Med 100, 171-178.
PMID:8629651(PubMed abstract) Karam, G.H., and Griffin, F.M., Jr. (1986). Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in nonimmunocompromised, nonneutropenic hosts. Rev Infect Dis 8, 357-363.
PMID:3726394(PubMed abstract) Patterson, T.F., Kirkpatrick, W.R., White, M., Hiemenz, J.W., Wingard, J.R., Dupont, B., Rinaldi, M.G., Stevens, D.A., and Graybill, J.R. (2000). Invasive aspergillosis. Disease spectrum, treatment practices, and outcomes. I3 Aspergillus Study Group. Medicine (Baltimore) 79, 250-260.
PMID:10941354(PubMed abstract) Perfect, J.R., Cox, G.M., Lee, J.Y., Kauffman, C.A., de Repentigny, L., Chapman, S.W., Morrison, V.A., Pappas, P., Hiemenz, J.W., and Stevens, D.A. (2001). The impact of culture isolation of Aspergillus species: a hospital-based survey of aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis 33, 1824-1833.
PMID:11692293(PubMed abstract) Pound, M.W., Drew, R.H., and Perfect, J.R. (2002). Recent advances in the epidemiology, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of fungal pneumonia. Curr Opin Infect Dis 15, 183-194.
PMID:11964921(PubMed abstract) Singh, G., Fries, J.F., Spitz, P., and Williams, C.A. (1989). Toxic effects of azathioprine in rheumatoid arthritis. A national post-marketing perspective. Arthritis Rheum 32, 837-843.
PMID:2751718(PubMed abstract) Soubani, A.O., and Chandrasekar, P.H. (2002). The clinical spectrum of pulmonary aspergillosis. Chest 121, 1988-1999.
PMID:12065367(PubMed abstract) Yu, V.L., Muder, R.R., and Poorsattar, A. (1986). Significance of isolation of Aspergillus from the respiratory tract in diagnosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Results from a three-year prospective study. Am J Med 81, 249-254.
PMID:3090879(PubMed abstract)
Anderson, R.J., Schafer, L.A., Olin, D.B., and Eickhoff, T.C. (1973). Infectious risk factors in the immunosuppressed host. Am J Med 54, 453-460.
PMID:4572173(PubMed abstract)
Denning, D.W. (1998). Invasive aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis 26, 781-803; quiz 804-785.
PMID:9564455(PubMed abstract)
Denning, D.W., and Stevens, D.A. (1990). Antifungal and surgical treatment of invasive aspergillosis: review of 2,121 published cases. Rev Infect Dis 12, 1147-1201.
PMID:2267490(PubMed abstract)
Fortun, J., Martin-Davila, P., Moreno, S., De Vicente, E., Nuno, J., Candelas, A., Barcena, R., and Garcia, M. (2002). Risk factors for invasive aspergillosis in liver transplant recipients. Liver Transpl 8, 1065-1070.
PMID:12424722(PubMed abstract)
Horvath, J.A., and Dummer, S. (1996). The use of respiratory-tract cultures in the diagnosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Am J Med 100, 171-178.
PMID:8629651(PubMed abstract)
Karam, G.H., and Griffin, F.M., Jr. (1986). Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in nonimmunocompromised, nonneutropenic hosts. Rev Infect Dis 8, 357-363.
PMID:3726394(PubMed abstract)
Patterson, T.F., Kirkpatrick, W.R., White, M., Hiemenz, J.W., Wingard, J.R., Dupont, B., Rinaldi, M.G., Stevens, D.A., and Graybill, J.R. (2000). Invasive aspergillosis. Disease spectrum, treatment practices, and outcomes. I3 Aspergillus Study Group. Medicine (Baltimore) 79, 250-260.
PMID:10941354(PubMed abstract)
Perfect, J.R., Cox, G.M., Lee, J.Y., Kauffman, C.A., de Repentigny, L., Chapman, S.W., Morrison, V.A., Pappas, P., Hiemenz, J.W., and Stevens, D.A. (2001). The impact of culture isolation of Aspergillus species: a hospital-based survey of aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis 33, 1824-1833.
PMID:11692293(PubMed abstract)
Pound, M.W., Drew, R.H., and Perfect, J.R. (2002). Recent advances in the epidemiology, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of fungal pneumonia. Curr Opin Infect Dis 15, 183-194.
PMID:11964921(PubMed abstract)
Singh, G., Fries, J.F., Spitz, P., and Williams, C.A. (1989). Toxic effects of azathioprine in rheumatoid arthritis. A national post-marketing perspective. Arthritis Rheum 32, 837-843.
PMID:2751718(PubMed abstract)
Soubani, A.O., and Chandrasekar, P.H. (2002). The clinical spectrum of pulmonary aspergillosis. Chest 121, 1988-1999.
PMID:12065367(PubMed abstract)
Yu, V.L., Muder, R.R., and Poorsattar, A. (1986). Significance of isolation of Aspergillus from the respiratory tract in diagnosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Results from a three-year prospective study. Am J Med 81, 249-254.
PMID:3090879(PubMed abstract)
