History of Present Illness
2010 May Featured Case Summary: A boy with fevers after traveling to Nigeria in summer.
A 5-year-old boy was well until 2 days before admission when, while visiting relatives during a one-month trip to Nigeria in summer, headache developed bilaterally. He felt warm to the touch and his mother administered ibuprofen. The next day, before returning to the United States, he saw a family physician because of a high fever, and amoxicillin (one dose), paracetomol (acetaminophen) and a vitamin supplement were reportedly administered.
During the plane flight to the United States, fevers reportedly recurred intermittently and nausea developed, with one episode of vomiting non-bloody emesis. At approximately 5 AM, jerking of the arms occurred, with shaking of 2 minutes’ duration, associated with hypersalivation, transient loss of consciousness and urinary incontinence; tongue-biting did not occur. The flight crew administered oxygen via mask. After the shaking resolved, he was placed on the floor and was somnolent. He was later transferred to business class for the remaining 45 minutes of the flight. When the plane landed, he was reportedly acting himself, crying, moving all four extremities spontaneously. He did not appear confused, and was able to identify his mother.
He was taken by ambulance to the emergency department of the nearest hospital.
Past Medical History
He had previously been well, with no history of sickle cell disease, previous hospitalizations or surgery.
Medications
He had recently taken ibuprofen, amoxicillin (one dose), paracetomol (acetaminophen) and a vitamin supplement.
Allergies
He had no allergies.
Family History
The mother reported that her family could not take ‘quin’ medications, but did not know if any relatives had glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency.
Epidemiological History
The patient was born in the United States of Nigerian parents, and lived in the Southeastern United States. The family frequently returned to Africa to visit relatives.
Physical Examination
The patient was awake and conversant. The temperature was 104.8°F (40.4°C), pulse 140 beats per minute, and respirations 28 breaths per minute, with oxygen saturation 98% while breathing ambient air. The weight was 19.5 kilograms. The abdomen was soft, and the liver was palpated 2 cm below the costal margin. There were multiple small excoriated lesions on the arms and legs, and 5-6 facial nonerythematous papules (1-2 mm diameter) on the face and neck. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white cell count was 14,200 per cubic millimeter (reference range 5500-15,500) with 50% leukocytes, 34% band forms, 11% lymphocytes, 1% monocytes and 4% metamyelocytes; the hematocrit was 32.8% (ref. 34.0-40.0), hemoglobin 11.8 gm/dl (ref. 11.5-13.5) and platelets 197,000 per cubic millimeter, with 1+ polychromasia and 1+ microcytosis, and possible intracellular abnormalities. The serum sodium was 131 mmol/liter (ref 135-145), chloride 95 mmol/liter (ref 100-108), carbon dioxide 21.3 mmol/liter (ref 23.0-31.9), glucose 120 mg/dl (ref 70-110), total bilirubin level 4.8 mg/dl (ref 0-1.0), direct bilirubin 2.4 mg/dl (ref 0-0.4), aspartate aminotransferase 186 U/L (ref 10-40) and alanine aminotransferase 97 U/L (ref 10-55). The levels of potassium, protein, albumin and alkaline phosphatase and tests of renal function were normal.
Urinalysis revealed 1+ bilirubin, 2+ ketones, and 1+ occult blood and there were 5-10 white cells and 3-5 red cells per high-power field and 0-2 hyaline casts per low-power field.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Thick and thin smears of the peripheral blood with Giemsa staining are shown (Figures 1 and 2).
Figure 1. Peripheral blood, thick smear, with Giemsa staining.
Figure 2. Peripheral blood, thin smear, with Giemsa staining.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The hematology laboratory personnel suspected intracellular organisms on examination of the peripheral blood smear. The parasitology laboratory staff examined thick and thin peripheral blood smears with Giemsa staining, and identified intracellular organisms within the erythrocytes, including cells with ring forms with double chromatin dots (“headphone’ formations) and multiple ring forms (Figure 3, with arrows showing some of the intracellular trophozoite ring forms). The organisms were identified to be consistent with Plasmodium falciparum. The parasitemia level was estimated to be 10%. A blood culture was sterile.
Figure 3. Detail of Figure 2, thin smear, Giemsa stain, with trophozoite ring forms (arrows).
Treatment and Followup
In the emergency department, normal saline was administered intravenously and acetaminophen was given; the child’s headache improved and the temperature decreased. Once the results of the laboratory tests were known and after discussion with physicians at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) regarding the family history and possible risk of an adverse reaction, quinidine gluconate (10 mg/kg of salt) was administered intravenously over 2 hours, followed by continuous infusion of 0.02 mg salt/kg/minute under close monitoring. Clindamycin (10 mg/kg loading dose, then 5 mg/kg every 8 hours) was also given and oral intake was encouraged. The parasitemia decreased to 8% on the afternoon of admission, to 3.5% the next day and less than 0.5% the 3rd day. At discharge on the 4th day, no parasites were seen. The hematocrit decreased to 29.1% on the 3rd day; tests of liver function test returned to normal and the bilirubin levels improved. The electrocardiogram was closely monitored while the patient was on quinidine therapy. Within 24 hours on therapy, the QTc interval increased from an admission measurement of 0.499 to a peak of 0.585; 3 hours later, it had improved 0.515.
The patient improved and was discharged on the 4th day. He returned to his home in the Southeastern United States, to follow up with his pediatrician and complete the therapy. After discharge, results of stool examination returned positive for Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts.
Discussion
Fevers in a traveler returning from Africa may be due to infectious illnesses that can rapidly cause severe morbidity and mortality, and consequently urgent evaluations are required to administer appropriate treatment quickly. Very young and/or malnourished children are especially vulnerable to adverse outcomes related to high fevers, sepsis, dehydration and other sequelae, such as seizures and anemia. Regardless of age, diagnosis of P. falciparum, especially with central nervous system involvement, is a medical emergency in which prompt diagnosis and treatment can be lifesaving.
In this case, clues to the diagnosis included the history of recent travel to an area endemic for P. falciparum (and its vector, the female Anopheles mosquito), the high fever on examination, the absence of eschar lesions (more suggestive of Rickettsial diseases) or other focal findings, and the laboratory findings. Of note, intraerythrocytic parasites in Babesiosis, caused by Babesia microti and other subspecies, may be similar in appearance to P. falciparum. When present, the ‘Maltese cross’ configuration seen in Babesiosis may help differentiate the two. In this case, the travel history is far more suggestive of P. falciparum. Serologic and molecular testing may be used to make the diagnosis definitively, if needed. The dimorphic fungus Histoplasma, though present in Africa, is seen inside white blood cells, not red blood cells, on peripheral smear.
Travel-related illnesses, such as malaria, can often be prevented with appropriate measures. Vaccinations should be delivered and antimalarial medications (chosen based on regional resistance patterns) begun before the planned journey, followed by avoidance measures, such as insect repellant and insecticide-treated mosquito netting, while traveling. This patient had not received prophylactic antimalarial treatment. Expatriates, who may have waning or absent immunologic protection, and individual travelers visiting relatives in endemic areas are among those travelers with the highest rates of malaria infection [Ladhani et al 2007].
In the hospital, the patient's initial treatment was directed towards decreasing the temperature (lowering the risk of febrile seizures) and rehydration. After the diagnosis of P. falciparum was made, the organism was presumed to be resistant to chloroquine based on the geographical region visited [CDC references 2 and 3]. Because of the concern for cerebral malaria and the high parasitemia level, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and treated with intravenous quinidine and clindamycin, with close cardiac and glucose monitoring. More recently, intravenous artesunate has become available for the treatment of individuals with severe or complicated malaria in the U.S. through an investigational new drug (IND) protocol maintained by the U.S. CDC. Information on indications and logistics of receiving artesunate are available at the CDC web site (http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis_treatment/artesunate.html) [CDC reference 1].
In recent years, new efforts are being made to eradicate malaria worldwide. Approximately 850,000 deaths per year occur worldwide from malaria, of which approximately 90% are caused by P. falciparum and, in sub-Saharan Africa, greater than 80% of malaria-related deaths occur in children under the age of 5 years [Crawley et al 2010]. The World Health Organization (WHO) has revised guidelines for treatment to include recently developed artemisinin combination therapies (ACTs) and suggested removing artemisinin monotherapy from availability to avoid the development of resistance [WHO 2010]. In April, 2009, the first artemisinin-based combination drug (artemether-lumefantrine) was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the oral treatment of individuals with uncomplicated malarial infections caused by P. falciparum. This medication is considered to be a front-line therapy for individuals with uncomplicated chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum malaria in the U.S. Other oral agents include 1) therapeutic dose atovaquone-proguanil; 2) quinine plus either doxycycline, tetracycline or clindamycin; or 3) mefloquine, although, because of drug resistance, this agent is not recommended in persons who have acquired malaria in Southeast Asia.
Final Diagnosis
Malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum in a young child, after a visit to family in Africa.
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Artesunate is available to treat severe malaria in the United States. http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis_treatment/artesunate.html Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Malaria treatment 2010 guidelines. http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis_treatment/treatment.html (Last accessed May 11, 2010) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Travelers' Health Yellow Book. Chapter 2. The Pre-Travel Consultation: Malaria. http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2010/chapter-2/malaria.aspx (Last accessed May 11, 2010) Fraser, I.P., Cserti, C.M., and Dzik, W.H. (2006). Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 32-2006. A 3-year-old girl with fever after a visit to Africa. N Engl J Med 355, 1715-1722.
PMID:17050896(PubMed abstract) Hill, D.R., Ericsson, C.D., Pearson, R.D., Keystone, J.S., Freedman, D.O., Kozarsky, P.E., DuPont, H.L., Bia, F.J., Fischer, P.R., and Ryan, E.T. (2006). The practice of travel medicine: guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 43, 1499-1539.
PMID:17109284(PubMed abstract) Ladhani, S., Aibara, R.J., Riordan, F.A., and Shingadia, D. (2007). Imported malaria in children: a review of clinical studies. Lancet Infect Dis 7, 349-357
PMID:17448938(PubMed abstract) World Health Organization (WHO) Guidelines for the treatment of malaria, 2nd edition. 2010 http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/9789241547925/en/index.html. (Last accessed May 11, 2010).
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Artesunate is available to treat severe malaria in the United States. http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis_treatment/artesunate.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Malaria treatment 2010 guidelines. http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis_treatment/treatment.html (Last accessed May 11, 2010)
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Travelers' Health Yellow Book. Chapter 2. The Pre-Travel Consultation: Malaria. http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2010/chapter-2/malaria.aspx (Last accessed May 11, 2010)
Fraser, I.P., Cserti, C.M., and Dzik, W.H. (2006). Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 32-2006. A 3-year-old girl with fever after a visit to Africa. N Engl J Med 355, 1715-1722.
PMID:17050896(PubMed abstract)
Hill, D.R., Ericsson, C.D., Pearson, R.D., Keystone, J.S., Freedman, D.O., Kozarsky, P.E., DuPont, H.L., Bia, F.J., Fischer, P.R., and Ryan, E.T. (2006). The practice of travel medicine: guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 43, 1499-1539.
PMID:17109284(PubMed abstract)
Ladhani, S., Aibara, R.J., Riordan, F.A., and Shingadia, D. (2007). Imported malaria in children: a review of clinical studies. Lancet Infect Dis 7, 349-357
PMID:17448938(PubMed abstract)
World Health Organization (WHO) Guidelines for the treatment of malaria, 2nd edition. 2010 http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/9789241547925/en/index.html. (Last accessed May 11, 2010).
