History of Present Illness
2010 February Featured Case and Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A man with a cough, fevers and hypotension.
A man in his fifties had been well until 2 weeks before presentation, when upper respiratory symptoms, including nasal congestion and sore throat, developed transiently. Approximately four days before admission, fevers occurred, which rose during the next few days to 102.5°F (39.2°C), associated with diaphoresis. Three days before, he went to work but left early because of fatigue. Subjective fevers persisted, and he slept through the afternoon and night. He had self-administered acetylsalicylic acid for his symptoms.
The day before admission, at a medical out-patient clinic, he reported fatigue and diffuse myalgias, without cough; the upper respiratory symptoms had resolved. He looked tired and pale; the temperature was 102.3°F (39.1°C) and blood pressure 118/88 mm Hg, with no other abnormalities noted. A rapid test for influenza viruses was negative, and blood tests were sent. Acetaminophen was administered and he returned home. In the evening, a nurse contacted him after the results of the blood tests, including a white cell count of 15,600 cells per cubic millimeter (neutrophils 87%, lymphocytes 6%, monocytes 6% and eosinophils 1%) were known. His symptoms reportedly were unchanged; he was drinking fluids and had a friend staying overnight. He was advised to seek follow-up for change in symptoms and be in contact the next morning.
That night, chest and shoulder pain developed on the right side, which was relieved by sitting up and forward; he later fell asleep. At 5 AM on the day of admission, he called his friend because of difficulty breathing. His friend noted he could barely speak and called emergency medical services (EMS). Upon arrival, the patient was diaphoretic with a systolic blood pressure of 70-79 mm Hg. He was brought to an emergency department, where he reported cough productive of reddish sputum.
Past Medical History
He had a history of hypertension.
Medications
Medications included hydrochlorothiazide.
Allergies
He had no allergies.
Family History
His father had had lung cancer.
Social History
He worked in an office, lived alone and was physically active.
Epidemiological History
A friend had recently been ill with upper respiratory symptoms.
Physical Examination
On examination, he appeared toxic, diaphoretic, and coughing up rust-tinged sputum. The temperature was normal; the systolic blood pressure was 70-80 mm Hg with tachycardia and labored breathing. There were decreased breath sounds on the right. The distal extremities were cyanotic and cold, and the skin was diffusely mottled, without rash, petechiae, purpura, or stigmata of embolic disease. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
Arterial blood gases showed pH 7.30, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) 29 mm Hg and partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) 97 mm Hg while breathing 100% oxygen by non-rebreather mask. The white blood cell count was 3,000/mm³ (reference range 4500-11,000) with neutrophils 46%, band forms 40% and lymphocytes 14%; the serum level of urea nitrogen was 30 mg/dl (ref 8-25), creatinine 3.0 mg/dl (ref 0.6-1.5), lactic acid 4.8 mmol/L (ref 0.5-2.2), total bilirubin 1.7 mg/dl (ref 0-1.0) and direct bilirubin 0.8 mg/dl (ref 0-0.4), and there were mildly decreased levels of potassium, bicarbonate, calcium, phosphorus and magnesium. The hematocrit, platelet count, and levels of alkaline phosphatase, transaminases, amylase, lipase, total protein (6.7 g/dL), creatine kinase, and troponin T were normal.
A chest radiograph showed opacities in the right lower lobe suggestive of pneumonia (Figure 1). Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed opacities in the middle and lower lobes, with a large pleural effusion on the right side (Figure 2). A spiculated nodule (1.3 cm in diameter) was also noted in the right upper lobe (Figure 3), with multiple enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph.
Figure 2. Chest CT scan.
Figure 3. Chest CT scan.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Shortly after arrival in the emergency department, the trachea was intubated emergently for respiratory distress, mechanical ventilation was begun and a central line was placed. Pressors, intravenous fluids (5 liters normal saline) and broad-spectrum antibiotics (ampicillin, levofloxacin, and vancomycin) were administered, and metronidazole, clindamycin and cefepime were added. He was admitted to the intensive care unit.
Ninety minutes after arrival, arterial blood gases, while ventilated on 100% oxygen, showed pH of 7.10, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) 71 mm Hg and partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) 164 mm Hg. Additional studies included transthoracic echocardiography, which showed severe global hypokinesis with an ejection fraction of 17%.
A sputum specimen was obtained; gram stain is shown in Figure 4. Pleurocentesis was performed; gram stain of the pleural fluid is shown in Figure 5. The level of protein in the pleural fluid was 4.0 g/dL, cholesterol 53 mg/dL and lactate dehydrogenase was 3950 U/L. Culture of a blood specimen from the day before admission was sterile.
By the 3rd day, he was oliguric; the level of urea nitrogen was 74 mg/dL and creatinine 7.3 mg/dL; coagulation tests had increased; tests of liver function had doubled, and the level of creatine kinase was 2242 U/L (ref 60-400 in men) and creatine kinase isoenzymes 15.7 ng/ml (ref 0.0-6.9).
Figure 4. Gram stain of sputum.
Figure 5. Gram stain of pleural fluid.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The gram stains of the sputum and pleural fluid showed abundant polymorphonuclear leukocytes and gram positive cocci in pairs and a few short chains. The culture of the sputum and the pleural fluid grew moderate group A Streptococcus, which was susceptible to all antibiotics tested.
Testing of a nasal specimen for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, a urine specimen for Legionella pneumophil a antigen and a stool specimen for Clostridium difficile toxin was negative. Other tests for respiratory viruses, mycobacteria and Pneumocystis were also negative.
Treatment and Followup
Steroids, drotrecogin alfa and intravenous immunoglobulin were administered, in addition to broad spectrum antibiotics, pressors, and intravenous fluids. Oliguric renal failure required initiation of renal-replacement therapy by means of continuous venovenous hemofiltration and, later, hemodialysis. During the first 10 days, the level of creatine kinase rose to 14,000 U/L (ref 60-400 in men), which was thought to be due to rhabdomyolysis, and the aspartate aminotransferase level peaked at 10 times normal. He gradually improved and was discharge from the hospital 3 weeks after admission. Coagulation parameters had returned to normal within 10 days of admission, hepatic function within 1 month, and renal function within 2 months. Four months after admission, a follow-up echocardiogram revealed an ejection fraction of 60%, with normal ventricular function.
Follow-up CT of the chest, performed 2 months after admission, revealed a persistent spiculated lesion in the right lung (Figure 6) and resolving pneumonia. The next month, fine needle aspiration of the lesion was performed, and pathological examination of the tissue showed non-small cell carcinoma, which was later confirmed by pathological examination of tissue after lobectomy to be moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma.
Figure 6. Follow up chest CT scan.
Discussion
This patient developed group A streptococcal pneumonia complicated by streptococcal toxic-shock syndrome (STSS). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2010 case definition for STSS [CDC 2010] includes the following criteria: hypotension with systolic blood pressure less than or equal to 90 mm Hg plus at least 2 criteria indicating multi-organ involvement (renal, hepatic, coagulopathy, respiratory with hypoxia, macular rash and/or soft-tissue necrosis), and laboratory isolation of group A Streptococcus. This patient met the case definition for STSS based on fulfilling the following criteria: hypotension, renal failure, elevated transaminases, prolonged coagulation parameters and confirmation of the diagnosis with growth of group A Streptococcus from a normally sterile space (the pleural fluid), as well as from a non-sterile site, the sputum. In addition, he demonstrated evidence of cardiomyopathy.
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS) has been associated with streptococcal infection, usually group A streptococci, and Staphylococcus aureus infection. The disorder is thought to be mediated by bacterial superantigen production. In contrast to conventional antigens which bind 0.01 to 0.1% of T-cell receptors (TCR), superantigens interact directly with the V-beta region of the TCR and can activate 5-30% of T-cells. This excessive T-cell activation is thought to lead to a "cytokine storm", which causes hypotension and multi-organ failure. Streptococcal TSS has been associated with mortality rates between 13% (from any source) and 80% (with myositis) [Lappin and Ferguson 2009]. Staphylococcus aureus TSS, which has a lower mortality rate than streptococcal TSS, has been seen in association with a superficial burn, a surgical wound or menses. Staphylococcal TSS may also occur in the absence of a known source of infection, possibly because of colonization with a toxin-producing species and disruption of skin or mucosa. Both streptococcal and staphylococcal TSS may present with rash and can proceed to desquamation.
In this patient, the sputum and pleural fluid gram stains, with gram-positive cocci in pairs or short chains, are more suggestive of streptococci than staphylococci. While Legionella could cause sepsis, the gram stains in this case are not consistent with this pathogen.
The biphasic nature of this patient’s illness suggests that this episode of streptococcal TSS may have been a post-viral complication. Analysis of multiple influenza pandemics from the 20th century has suggested that secondary infection by common respiratory tract bacteria, including non-pneumococcal Streptococcus, has been responsible for the majority of associated deaths [Morens et al 2008].
Final Diagnosis
Toxic shock syndrome, pneumonia, and empyema caused by group A Streptococcus.
References
http://www.cdc.gov/ncphi/disss/nndss/print/streptococcalcurrent.htm, most recently accessed February 8, 2010. Lappin, E., and Ferguson, A.J. (2009). Gram-positive toxic shock syndromes. Lancet Infect Dis 9, 281-290.
PMID:19393958(PubMed abstract) Morens, D.M., Taubenberger, J.K., and Fauci, A.S. (2008). Predominant role of bacterial pneumonia as a cause of death in pandemic influenza: implications for pandemic influenza preparedness. J Infect Dis 198, 962-970.
PMID:18710327(PubMed abstract)
http://www.cdc.gov/ncphi/disss/nndss/print/streptococcalcurrent.htm, most recently accessed February 8, 2010.
Lappin, E., and Ferguson, A.J. (2009). Gram-positive toxic shock syndromes. Lancet Infect Dis 9, 281-290.
PMID:19393958(PubMed abstract)
Morens, D.M., Taubenberger, J.K., and Fauci, A.S. (2008). Predominant role of bacterial pneumonia as a cause of death in pandemic influenza: implications for pandemic influenza preparedness. J Infect Dis 198, 962-970.
PMID:18710327(PubMed abstract)
