History of Present Illness
Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A young adult with headache and fever.
A young adult (A patient's age is often a critical factor in infectious disease diagnosis, affecting both the spectrum of illness and type of organisms involved.) male student presented with fever and headache (While many infections can produce fever, often with secondary symptoms such as headache, the combination of fever with prominent headache should always raise the possibility of central nervous system infection.). One week before his presentation, the patient was seen at an outside clinic with a sore throat. An upper respiratory viral syndrome was diagnosed and supportive care, including fluids, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and decongestants, advised.
Sore throat and low-grade fevers continued.
On the day of presentation, headache developed. His friends reported that the patient was not behaving normally. He was brought back to the clinic and, after he became more confused (The combination of fever, headache and changes in mental status in a previously healthy young person strongly suggests central nervous system infection and should be considered a medical emergency.) and combative, transferred to a hospital.
Past Medical History
The patient had received the meningococcal vaccine (The meningococcal vaccine is recommended for people who will be living in close quarters, such as dormitories. Of note, one common type of meningococcus, group B, is not covered by this vaccine, since the polysaccharides of this type are very similar to a human antigen. Therefore, even vaccinated people are still at risk for group B infection.).
Epidemiological History
He lived in a dormitory (Dormitories, military barracks, prisons, and other settings where individuals live in close contact increase the rate of spread of organisms transmitted by contact or droplets.) and was sexually active (The sexual history is a critical part of the infectious diseases work-up [Terminology: The work-up refers to the entire process of diagnosis, including history, physical examination, laboratory studies, cultures, and imaging], both because the organisms involved may be sexually transmitted and because it influences that the patient may have HIV infection and be immunocompromised. [Terminology: A patient whose immune system is not functioning normally is said to be 'immunocompromised'.] Knowing the immune status of the patient is one of the most critical parts of the infectious diseases work-up, since it has a major influence on the type of organisms involved and upon the risk of severe infection.), with men (Although being sexually active with men is not in and of itself a risk factor, among men who have sex with men (MSM), there are higher rates of high risk behaviors such as unprotected anal intercourse, so it is important to elicit the patient's sexual history, in order to better assess HIV risks.). He denied any sick contacts (Exposure to a person with similar symptoms is often an important diagnostic clue.) or drug use (Patients with a history of injection drug use should be asked about sharing of needles, to assess the risk of blood-borne infections.).
Physical Examination
The patient appeared confused and combative. The temperature (Normal: approximately 97-99°F.) was 100.3°F (37.9°C), pulse (Normal heart rates can vary widely, but in general a heart rate over 100 beats per minute would be considered tachycardia.) 117 beats per minute, blood pressure (Normal value 100-120 systolic and 60-80 diastolic.) 120/82 mm Hg, respirations (Normal value 12-20 breaths per minute.) 20 per minute, and oxygen saturation (Normal value 95-100 % while breathing ambient air.) 99%. There were no exudates (Exudate in this context refers to visible and typically whitish pus, which consists of white blood cells and often indicates acute bacterial infection.) on his tonsils; the neck was stiff (The lining around the central nervous system, the meninges, is extremely sensitive to inflammation of any kind, including infection. Patients experience inflammation of the meninges as an inability to flex the neck, since this action stretches the meninges. The combination of fever, headache and stiff neck strongly suggests the patient has clinical meningitis. Many illnesses can give sore muscles including neck muscles, but a fever and a stiff neck is a medical emergency requiring immediate evaluation.); the lungs were clear (Jargon: clear lungs refers to the presence of normal breath sounds.) and there was a II/VI holosystolic (Terminology: a holosystolic heart murmur, constant all the way from the first heart sound (S1) to the second (S2), may be due to increased blood flow when the heart is beating forcefully and fast, or it could indicate dysfunction of particular valves, such as the sound heard in mitral regurgitation.) murmur. The skin and joints were normal. On neurological examination, he alternated between confused and somnolent; Kernig’s (Terminology: pain and resistance on extension of the knee when the leg is flexed at the hip, indicating meningeal inflammation.) and Brudinski’s (Terminology: involuntary lifting of the leg when the patient is lying supine and the neck is flexed, indicating meningeal inflammation.) signs were negative (Concept: most medical tests are not 100% sensitive, that is, there are some false negatives.).
Studies
Computed tomography (CT is often performed before lumbar puncture since the latter can be risky if intracranial pressure is too high.) (CT) of the head was negative. The white blood cell (The normal reference range at the hospital was 5,000-11,000 cells per cubic millimeter.) count was 18,000/mm³ with 25% band forms (Terminology: Newly created neutrophils have a band-like nucleus visible under the microscope. The presence of many bands suggest the immune system is making a large number of new white blood cells, indicating severe infection.). Tests of liver function were normal.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was started emergently (The disease process in meningitis progresses very rapidly and may be life-threatening, so antibiotics and antivirals must be given empirically as quickly as possible, without waiting for culture data.) on steroids (Much of the tissue injury in meningitis is caused by inflammation, so rapid institution of powerful anti-inflammatory medicines are used to block this. At the time of this publication, exactly which patients should receive steroids is still somewhat controversial and is a matter of active research.), ceftriaxone (A long-acting beta-lactam antibiotic that would be effective against Neisseria, Haemophilus influenzae, and most Streptococcus pneumoniae, also referred to as pneumococci.), vancomycin (An antibiotic with very broad activity against Gram positive organisms, including pneumococci resistant to beta-lactam antibiotics.), and acyclovir (An antiviral drug effective against Herpes Simplex Viruses.). A lumbar puncture was performed after the above treatment was administered. A gram stain of the cerebrospinal fluid (Normal cerebrospinal fluid has no cells in it. The presence of white blood cells suggests inflammation and the presence of large numbers of neutrophils is highly suggestive of bacterial infection.) is shown in Figures 1 and 2.
Figure 1. Gram stain of spun cerebrospinal fluid.
Figure 2. Detail of Figure 1.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The gram stain of the cerebrospinal fluid was positive for gram-negative diplococci consistent with Neisseria meningitidis. The gram stain is shown under high power (The size, shape, color and uniformity of the objects visible in the cytoplasm of some of the neutrophils suggest bacterial infection, and in particular, the kidney-bean shaped diplococci suggest Neisseria, of which Neisseria meningiditis would be by far the most likely.) in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Gram stain of cerebrospinal fluid, high power.
Treatment and Followup
Steroids were administered for three days and the antibiotic therapy changed to intravenous penicillin 24 million units daily. The patient's mental status improved within 36 hours, and he was discharged home to complete ten days of penicillin.
The culture of the cerebrospinal fluid did not grow the organism, most likely due to the treatment with antibiotics prior to his lumbar puncture. Blood cultures remained negative.
Discussion
In cases such as this one, it is important to treat for bacterial meningitis expeditiously even though several more benign diagnoses may be in the differential.
Epidemiologically, the patient is at risk for meningococcal meningitis given his group-living situation in a dormitory. The risk of invasive meningococcal infection appears to be higher during the first year than in subsequent years of college attendance. Pneumococcal meningitis also remains a significant possibility, and therefore both should be covered. Lack of exposure to areas endemic for the vectors responsible for the spread of rickettsial disease and the absence of rash make Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever less likely.
Viral causes of meningitis/encephalitis should also be entertained, including HIV and herpes simplex virus (HSV). Bacteremic seeding of the meninges from endocarditis or other sources is possible, though less likely than the previously mentioned causes of meningitis.
Given the patient’s altered mental status, CT scanning of the head is a reasonable first step in evaluation, but antibiotics should not be withheld while awaiting data.
Final Diagnosis
Meningococcal meningitis.
References
