History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Summary: A teenager with a chronic suppurative lesion on the forehead.
A teenager presented with a 2-year history of a suppurative lesion on the forehead. The lesion started as a red papule on the surface of a traumatic scar. The papule began to suppurate and drain a yellowish material through multiple sinus tracts. Two years before this evaluation, a surgical resection was performed, followed by a course of oral dicloxacillin, with only partial remission.
On this presentation, the patient reported a frontal headache and drainage of granular material.
Past Medical History
The patient suffered a motor vehicle accident many years earlier that had resulted in an extensive scar on the right forehead.
Epidemiological History
The patient was born and living in the high jungle of Peru.
Physical Examination
The patient was afebrile. A lesion extending from the right forehead to the upper eyelid was observed. The lesion was painless with a granular aspect. Spontaneous drainage of a yellowish material through multiple sinus tracts was observed. (See Figure 1.) The remainder of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Studies
The hematocrit, white blood cell count, and liver function tests were normal. The chest radiograph was normal. Serologic tests for human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1) and HTLV-1 were negative. Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed osteomyelitis of the frontal bone, subdural effusion and cerebritis (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Brain CT scan.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A skin biopsy was performed. Purulent material was obtained for culture in aerobic and anaerobic media.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Pathology of the skin biopsy shows a large granule surrounded by eosinophilic material (Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon), micro abscesses and sinuses are also seen (Figure 3). A closer view of the granule shows that it is composed of aggregates of cocci-form bacteria (Figure 4). Staphylococus aureus was isolated.
Figure 3. Skin biopsy.
Figure 4. Granule with cocci-form bacteria.
Treatment and Followup
An extensive surgical resection of the frontal bone and drainage of the subdural collection was performed. Intravenous oxacillin was started and maintained for 1 month, then oral clindamycin was given for 6 months, with complete remission of the skin lesion. Six months after finishing the course of antibiotics, the patient returned with a relapse. At that time Staphylococus aureus resistant to oxacillin was isolated. Vancomycin was started, but was changed to clindamycin because the patient became pregnant.
Discussion
Botryomycosis is a chronic bacterial infection, usually caused by Staphylococcus aureus. Less commonly, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp. and other bacteria have been implicated.
The disease is rare - at the time of this publication, no more than 200 cases have been published - and is globally distributed. The skin and subcutaneous tissues are the most frequent locations. While the disease may remain localized to the skin for a long time, disseminated infection has been reported in debilitated patients. Chronic pulmonary infection has been reported in immunocompetent and in patients with AIDS. The pathogenesis is unclear. S. aureus may be seeded into the skin after trauma, as appears to have happened in this case, and after a silent period varying from months to years, a suppurative lesion may ensue. Host and bacterial factors may play a role in determining who will develop a chronic infection. Interestingly, neither humoral nor cellular immune deficiencies tend to markedly predispose patients to this infection.
The differential diagnosis includes other chronic and suppurative infections, particularly those where drainage of grains is a salient feature. Actinomycosis and fungal mycetoma are the main diagnoses to rule out. In actinomycosis, the pathological specimen will show a grain composed of filamentous bacteria, and the anaerobic culture will grow Actinomyces. In fungal mycetoma, the grain is composed of hyphae, with Madurella mycetomatis as the main causative agent. Other conditions such as leishmaniasis, tuberculosis, and endemic fungal infections are less frequently associated with this clinical picture. The treatment consists of both surgical resection and prolonged antibiotic treatment. Relapses and failure to eradicate the bacterium have been reported. This case depicts all classical features of this disease. It is not clear whether the infection will be eradicated in this patient despite prolonged courses of antibiotics and extensive surgical procedures.
Final Diagnosis
Botryomycosis, caused by Staphylococus aureus.
References
