History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Summary: A man in his twenties with weight loss, pulmonary infiltrate, respiratory failure and skin lesions.
A previously healthy man in his twenties was diagnosed as having community-acquired pneumonia by his primary care physician three months before his presentation. At that time he had complained of dyspnea on exertion, a non-productive cough and a low-grade fever. He was prescribed a course of oral antibiotics without clinical response. His symptoms persisted and a presumptive diagnosis of sarcoidosis with pulmonary involvement was made. He was started on high dose systemic steroids (oral prednisone 70 mg/day reduced by 10 mg every week) that resulted in temporary relief of symptoms.
On this admission, the patient complained of 25-pound weight loss over three months, night sweats, right-sided pleuritic chest pain and shortness of breath. He denied cough, hemoptysis and sputum production. He noticed small papular lesions, primarily on the face, neck, upper chest and upper back, that had appeared over the past few weeks. There was no discharge from the lesions and they were not pruritic or painful. The surrounding skin appeared normal.
Past Medical History
As above.
Medications
He had been taking prednisone, which was started at 70 mg/day, tapered over a period of 8 weeks, and stopped 2 weeks before his presentation.
Epidemiological History
The patient lived in Texas and had not traveled outside of the region. He worked in the construction industry and denied exposure to animals. He drank alcohol occasionally, and reported no tobacco or injection drug use.
Physical Examination
He was awake, alert and oriented, and appeared to be in moderate respiratory distress. The maximum temperature was 39.7°C (103.5°F), pulse 82 beats per minute, blood pressure 114/73 mm Hg, respirations 24 breaths per minute, with a pulse oximetry 87% on room air and 95% on 2 liters of oxygen via nasal cannula.
There were multiple cervical lymph nodes 1-2 cm in size, firm, mobile and non-tender. The lungs had coarse ronchi with bilateral expiratory wheezes. The liver was palpable 2 centimeters below the costal margin, firm, and non-tender. The spleen was not palpable. There were multiple papular lesions (varying in size from 4-6 mm in diameter) involving the face, neck, upper chest and back, some of which were hyperpigmented. (See Figures 1 and 2.) The lesions were extra-follicular and some had central umbilication. The rest of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Figure 2. Physical findings.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 2,800/mL (granulocytes 80.7%, lymphocytes 14.6%, monocytes 1.8%, eosinophils 2.2%, bands 0.7%), and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 66 mm after one hour. Electrolytes were sodium 138 mmol/L, potassium 3.9 mmol/L, chloride 106 mmol/L, CO2 20 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 31mg/ dL, creatinine 1.02 mg/dL. The total bilirubin was 1 mg/dL, albumin 1.7 g/ dL, alkaline phosphatase 480 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 58 U/ L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 156 U/L, gamma glutamyl-transpeptidase (GGT) 936 U/L, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 4558 U/L.
A chest radiograph (CXR) showed diffuse bilateral lung infiltrates, and a mildly enlarged heart. Computed tomography (CT) of the thorax and abdomen showed extensive diffuse ground glass alveolar opacities with some thickening along the bronchoalveolar bundles, mild mediastinal, bi-hilar and upper abdominal lymphadenopathy. There was also mild hepatosplenomegaly. Urine Legionella antigen and antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were negative. A blood culture showed no growth at 72 hours. There were rare mononuclear cells and rare neutrophils but no organisms on the sputum gram stain. The sputum culture showed 1+ respiratory flora.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) had diffuse ST segment and T wave changes compatible with pericarditis.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed. During the procedure the patient developed respiratory distress and required intubation and ventilator support.
Specimens were sent for cell count, cytology and culture (routine, fungal and mycobacterial). Skin biopsy was done of the papular lesions on the face, neck and upper trunk. The ECG indicated pericarditis but an echocardiogram did not reveal any evidence of pericardial effusion or tamponade. A chest radiograph showed diffuse bilateral infiltrates, hilar lymphadenopathy and a small right-sided pleural effusion. A presumptive diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia was made, pending results of the evaluation, and intravenous cefotaxime and azithromycin were begun.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
There were 2 nucleated red blood cells (RBCs) per 100 white cells. Serum Histoplasma antibody was positive. The bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) showed rare budding yeast with moderate mononuclear cells and moderate leukocytes. Cytopathology also showed budding yeast (mostly intrahistiocytic) on Wright-Giemsa stain (Figure 3) and Gomori methenamine silver (GMS) (Figure 4) stains. Hematoxylin and eosin (Figures 5 and 6) and GMS stains (Figure 7) of the skin biopsy of the papillary dermis showed mixed inflammation with leukocytoclasia associated with budding yeasts. Fungal blood culture, sputum and bronchoalveolar lavage specimen cultures all grew Histoplasma capsulatum.
Figure 3. Wright-Giemsa stain of BAL specimen.
Figure 4. GMS stain of BAL specimen.
Figure 5. H and E stain of skin biopsy.
Figure 6. H and E stain of skin biopsy.
Figure 7. GMS stain of skin biopsy.
Treatment and Followup
Intravenous amphotericin B (0.7 mg/kg/day) was administered for 3 weeks, with dramatic improvement and significant resolution of the skin lesions. Oral itraconazole (200mg twice daily) was started with the intention of completing a 6-month course.
Discussion
Histoplasma capsulatum is a ubiquitous dimorphic fungus that causes opportunistic infection in patients with an impaired immune system. In the United States, it is endemic in the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys. The initial infection is acquired by inhaling mycelial fragments and conidia from the soil. Construction workers and spelunkers are at increased risk. The mycelia settle in the alveoli, are engulfed by neutrophils and macrophages and are transported to the lymph nodes, liver and spleen.
A majority of the cases are asymptomatic and go unrecognized. Some patients develop cavitary pulmonary disease, which is similar in clinical and radiographic presentation to pulmonary tuberculosis. Few patients develop progressive disseminated histoplasmosis (PDH). Major risk factors for disseminated disease are age (>54 years or <2 years of age) and immunosuppression (HIV with a CD4+ count <200, Hodgkin’s or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, patients on immunosuppressive drugs). Patients usually present with fever, night sweats, headache, non-productive cough and chest pain. Physical findings include hepatosplenomegaly, cervical lymphadenopathy, rales, jaundice and oropharyngeal lesions. Cutaneous lesions may present as a maculopapular rash, petechiae or ecchymosis. Laboratory abnormalities may include anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase and alanine aminotransferase. Chest radiographs may reveal patchy pneumonitis with mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy. Acute pericarditis is seen in up to 6% of cases and is usually detected on ECG. Progressive mediastinal fibrosis, a rare presentation of histoplasmosis, can be fatal and untreatable.
The diagnosis is made by the isolation of H. capsulatum from tissue samples that include sputum, BAL specimen, blood and tissue. Tissue specimens can be stained with Gomori methenamine silver stain or Wright-Giemsa stain. The organism may take up to three weeks to grow in culture. The antigen can be detected in the serum and urine by radioimmunoassay or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Serologic tests are available for the detection of H. capsulatum antibodies and may help in a rapid diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis of a patient with acute pulmonary histoplasmosis can be difficult to distinguish from influenza, community-acquired pneumonia and sarcoidosis as illustrated by this case. The patient was initially diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia and treated with oral antibiotics without any improvement. A presumptive diagnosis of sarcoidosis was then made and the patient was put on high dose systemic steroids. It can be a challenge to differentiate between the two clinically. Serum angiotensin converting enzyme levels may be elevated in both diseases and they can both present with hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. In a patient from an endemic area who presents with these symptoms and a hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy, a diagnosis of histoplasmosis should be considered. Also, if present, skin lesions may provide an opportunity for rapid tissue diagnosis.
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated histoplasmosis caused by Histoplasma capsulatum.
References
