History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Summary: A young adult with a facial lesion.
A young adult woman developed a facial lesion. She was in her usual state of health when, four months before her presentation, she traveled to Costa Rica and stayed for 33 days. She visited a rural village in the forest during the first half of her trip and spent the rest of the time on the coast.
One week after her arrival, she developed a rash that started on both her legs, spared her feet, and came to involve up to her mid-thighs. This rash also involved both her forearms, sparing her palms, shoulders, upper chest, and face. She described this rash as red, with small “bumps”, itchy, and associated with swelling. She reported shaking chills, but denied nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The local physician she saw in Costa Rica diagnosed an allergic reaction to foliage and administered two injections of unknown medications. He described them as medications to help her pruritus and to decrease the inflammation. The rash lasted one-and-one-half weeks before completely resolving.
One week after returning home, she noticed a red papule on her right cheek. At first, it appeared to be a small acne lesion, but it did not improve. It grew in size and lost its smooth surface, becoming “bumpy”. She recalled no discharge or vesicular formation, but the lesion was slightly pruritic. She also noted some sensation of swelling at right lower eyelid. There were no associated fevers or chills with this rash.
About three weeks before presentation, she visited her primary physician. She was given mupirocin cream for one week as well as an unknown antibiotic, without improvement. Oral fluconazole (100 mg daily) was added for ten days, without change. She was then treated with itraconazole and minocycline for another 4-5 days. She stopped the minocycline when she developed a fine rash over her peripheral extremities on the second day of that medication. The day before presentation, erythromycin was begun.
She also noted swollen right axillary lymph nodes two weeks before her presentation; these resolved without treatment after four days. She reported no abdominal pain, dysuria, change in vision, headaches, change in hearing, or dysphagia.
Before her presentation, she had had two biopsies of the lesion, which had revealed a granulomatous dermatitis; no infectious organisms were seen.
Past Medical History
She had received immunizations for hepatitis A and B viruses before travel.
Medications
She was currently taking erythromycin. She had taken three “malaria pills” before travel to Costa Rica and the same medicine for one week in Costa Rica. While there, she was advised not to continue the medications.
Allergies
As above, minocycline caused a rash.
Epidemiological History
She was a student living in an apartment. She engaged in occasional alcohol use, and denied tobacco or illicit drug use.
Physical Examination
The temperature was 97.9°F (36.6°C), blood pressure 104/60 mm Hg, pulse 68 beats per minute, respirations 16 breaths per minute. She was a well-developed, well-nourished young woman in no distress, who was alert and oriented. There was a red lesion (5.5 cm in diameter) on the right cheek, with an overlying scab (2-cm diameter). (See Figure 1.) The surface of the lesion had several bumps, and was not smooth. A fine blanching light pink rash covered both aspects of bilateral lower arms and lower legs. There was a non-tender soft, motile right preauricular node (1.5 cm diameter), and no axillary lymphadenopathy. The neck was supple with full range of motion. The rest of her examination was normal.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Studies
The results of a third punch biopsy of the right cheek (performed one week before presentation) are shown in Figures 2, 3 and 4.
Figure 2. Figure 2: Hematoxylin and eosin stain of facial punch biopsy.
Figure 2: Hematoxylin and eosin stain of facial punch biopsy.
Figure 3. Punch biopsy of cheek.
Figure 4. Giemsa stain of punch biopsy.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The third punch biopsy of the right cheek demonstrated pan-dermal non-necrotic granuloma formation with surrounding lymphocytic inflammation. There was striking lymphocytic interface reaction with overlying parakeratosis. (See Figures 2 and 3.) Giemsa stain (Figure 4) demonstrated the presence of small intracellular organisms consistent with Leishman-Donovan bodies.
Acid-fast bacilli (AFB)/Fite stains and methenamine silver/PAS stains were negative for acid fast bacilli and fungi respectively.
Figure 2: Hematoxylin and eosin stain of facial punch biopsy.
Treatment and Followup
With the biopsy results and patient history, the diagnosis is most likely leishmaniasis. She received 21 days of pentavalent antimony by daily intravenous infusion. Her only symptoms were generalized myalgias, which resolved when the medication was completed. She also had an elevation of liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 227 U/L and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 208 U/L) during therapy. The pentostam was continued, and the liver enzymes decreased on their own to AST 75 U/L and ALT 111 U/L. She never developed abdominal complaints or hepatomegaly, jaundice, or liver tenderness on physical examination.
During therapy, the lesion decreased in size, as did the right-sided preauricular lymph node. When the pentavalent antimony was completed, the lesion was not yet completely healed, but did progressively improve. Near-complete healing to a flat, brown discoloration on her right check was accomplished 31 days after the treatment was completed.
Discussion
New world cutaneous leishmaniasis has several possible causative species: Leishmania braziliensis, L. mexicana, L. panamensis, and possibly L. chagasi. It is a zoonosis endemic to South and Central America, from Texas to Northern Argentina, but is most prevalent in Brazil and Peru. Small forest rodents are the major natural reservoirs of these organisms, and the vectors for human disease are Lutzomyia sandflies. Pets may serve as secondary reservoirs, and for L. peruviana, the major reservoir is dogs. The sandflies are most abundant in the forest. Thus, rural settlers and people working at the edge of the forest are most susceptible to disease, as was this young lady the first two weeks that she was in Costa Rica.
L. braziliensis was considered the most probable infectious species because she acquired this in Costa Rica. Among the new-world cutaneous leishmaniasis, L. braziliensis is the only form of these that carries a significant mortality. Old world leishmaniasis was considered less likely.
There are three different forms of leishmanial disease—cutaneous, mucosal, and visceral. Absence of mucosal involvement or physical findings other than the above cheek lesion localized lymphadenopathy suggested cutaneous disease. There was no detectable hepatosplenomegaly, and her arms and legs had no rash. The first rash she developed while in Costa Rica was probably a cutaneous reaction to the local flora.
A decision was made to treat this young lady as quickly as possible with pentostam partly to prevent dissemination, but also because of the infection’s location on the face, which can be disfiguring.
Final Diagnosis
Facial cutaneous leishmaniasis, caused by Leishmania spp.
References
