History of Present Illness
2009 March Featured Case Summary: A man in his fifties with epigastric pain.
A man in his fifties was admitted to the hospital with epigastric pain. He was well until the day before his presentation, when a sharp upper abdominal pain developed suddenly after eating a spicy meal. The pain was most severe in the epigastrium and rated 10 on a scale of 1 to 10, where 10 is the most severe. His temperature reportedly rose to 102.0°F (38.9°C). The pain decreased slightly, and then increased in severity 17 hours later. On the day of his admission, he felt chilled, became nauseated and vomited undigested food, with no blood. He took ibuprofen, and went to an urgent care clinic.
On evaluation, the pain rated 10 in intensity. The temperature was 99.2°F (37.3°C), and he appeared uncomfortable, flushed, and was shaking. There was tenderness in the epigastrium and right lower quadrant, with guarding in the right lower quadrant. An inguinal hernia was present on the right. There was no rebound or costovertebral angle tenderness. He was transferred to the emergency department of a hospital for evaluation.
On arrival, he reported that the pain had decreased to a level 3 in intensity and was not altered by sitting or standing. There was no history of diarrhea, blood per rectum, or urinary symptoms.
Past Medical History
He was otherwise well, with a past history of intermittent musculoskeletal strain related to lifting activities, bilateral simple renal cysts, and anemia (hematocrit 36.0%) noted 10 years earlier.
Medications
He had taken ibuprofen, and was on no other medications.
Allergies
He had no allergies.
Family History
His mother had had hypertension, and maternal relatives had diabetes mellitus.
Social History
He was married, and performed physical labor in a service industry.
Epidemiological History
He was of Hispanic ancestry. He drank alcohol socially, and did not smoke or use illicit drugs.
Physical Examination
On examination, he was thin and anicteric. The temperature was 98.7°F (37.1°C), blood pressure 85/58 mm Hg, pulse 117 beats per minute, and respirations 20 breaths per minute with oxygen saturation of 98% while breathing ambient air. The abdomen was soft, with mild epigastric pain, and no distension, rebound or guarding. Obturator, psoas, and Rovsing’s signs were absent, and there was no blood in the stool. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white cell count was 5,500 cells per cubic millimeter (reference range 4500-11,000 cells, with 75% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 16% band forms, 6% lymphocytes and 1% monocytes), the hematocrit 30.9% (ref 41.0-53.0%), hemoglobin 10.7 gm/dl (ref 13.5-17.5) with a mean corpuscular volume of 59 fl (ref 80-100), with 3+ microcytes and 1+ teardrops. The level of total bilirubin was 1.6 mg/dl (ref 0-1.0), direct bilirubin 0.5 mg/dl (ref 0-0.4), and the levels of amylase, lipase, cardiac enzymes and tests of liver function (alkaline phosphatase and transaminases) were normal. An electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia and right bundle branch block.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
During the next 8 hours, the pain level ranged from 0 to 5. Six hours after his arrival in the emergency department, an abdominal radiograph and computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis were performed (shown in Figures 1, 2, and 3).
Figure 1. Abdominal radiograph.
Figure 2. CT of the abdomen and pelvis.
Figure 3. CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis (coronal view).
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The CT scan revealed an enlarged inflamed tubular structure in the right lower quadrant (Figures 4 and 5, with arrows, and Figure 6), with surrounding inflammatory changes and fat stranding, a small amount of free fluid in the right paracolic gutter, a distended gallbladder and no free air or evidence of an abscess collection. There were also small renal cysts in the left kidney and degenerative changes of the bilateral iliac joints and lower lumbar spine. The findings were thought to be suggestive of acute appendicitis. A follow-up study, with contrast in the large bowel, did not show evidence of a patent appendix. An open appendectomy revealed acute suppurative appendicitis and periappendicitis, see Treatment/Follow-up section for more details.
Figure 4. CT with tubular abnormality (see arrows).
Figure 5. CT (coronal view) with tubular abnormality (arrows).
Figure 6. Detail of Figure 3, right lower quadrant magnified.
Treatment and Followup
Approximately 10 hours after his presentation, his temperature rose to 103°F (39.4°C), associated with rigors, tachycardia and nausea. Repeat examination revealed focal right lower quadrant tenderness and guarding. A follow-up white count was 14,700 cells/mm³. Cefoxitin was administered intravenously, and an open appendectomy was performed, revealing an inflamed appendix without perforation. Pathological examination of the resected tissue revealed an appendix (5.7 cm by 1.2 cm by 0.7 cm) and attached mesoappendix (4.2 cm by 0.6 cm by 0.2 cm), with pink-red, dull and hemorrhagic serosa and tan-yellow exudate, diagnostic of acute suppurative appendicitis and periappendicitis. No fecoliths were identified.
Post-operatively, the patient did well, and defervesced. He increased his activity and oral intake, and was discharged 25 hours after presentation, and advised to follow-up in Surgery Clinic for post-operative evaluation and with his primary care provider regarding the anemia.
Four days after discharge, blood cultures drawn on admission were reported as growing Eikenella corrodens (Figures 7 and 8) in the anaerobic bottle and Citrobacter freundii in the aerobic bottle, the latter of which was resistant to ampicillin and cefazolin. Attempts to reach the patient by telephone were unsuccessful.
Sixteen days post-operatively, the patient was seen in Surgery Clinic. Earlier that day, he had noted cloudy drainage from the wound. On examination, the incision was indurated; 3-5 cc. purulent discharge was expressed from the site, and a wick inserted. The remainder of the examination was normal.
A culture of the purulent discharge grew few Eikenella corrodens and few gram-negative rods which could not be speciated further. Metronidazole and levofloxacin were administered for 8 days; a follow-up examination revealed resolution of the incisional induration and purulent discharge. The results of evaluation of the patient’s anemia were not known.
Figure 7. Growth from anaerobic bottle on blood agar plate.
Figure 8. Gram stain of Eikenella, isolated from anaerobic bottle.
Discussion
On initial presentation, the diagnosis of appendicitis was not obvious. The patient had post-prandial epigastric pain; there was no fever on initial examinations, and he did not have pain with obturator, psoas, or Rovsing’s maneuvers. Eventually he developed more typical symptoms and signs of appendicitis: abdominal pain that varied in intensity and location; evolved over a 24-hour period; was associated with intermittent fever, anorexia, nausea and vomiting; and eventually became localized to the right lower quadrant with guarding. This case highlights the importance of considering the diagnosis of appendicitis, even in patients who initially have an atypical presentation.
The diagnosis of acute appendicitis was suggested by CT scan imaging and confirmed by the operative and pathologic findings. Although luminal obstructions and fecoliths appear responsible for some occurrences of appendicitis, they are not documented in many others, as in this case.
Acute appendicitis usually presents in young people, with less than 25% of cases seen in patients older than 45 years [Sifri and Madoff]. Cultures of inflamed appendiceal tissue most often yield mixed flora from the bowel, and cultures from surrounding tissue, including peritoneal fluid, have most often grown Escherichia coli from aerobic bottles and Bacteroides species from anaerobic bottles [Carr]. Bacteremia in appendicitis is not commonly identified: a study of 89 children with perforated appendices revealed only 5 cases of bacteremia (anaerobes were identified in all 5 cases) [Marchildon and Dudgeon], and bacteremia in cases of appendicitis without perforation is rare.
Eikenella, a facultative gram negative anaerobe and one of the HACEK organisms, is part of the normal flora of the oral cavity, and is more commonly identified as a pathogen in head and neck infections, such as those resulting from human bites. However, it is also found normally in the respiratory, gastrointestinal and genitourinary tracts [Steinberg and DelRio]. In a series of 19 intraabdominal infections caused by Eikenella, appendicitis occurred in 7 of the cases, and was the most common diagnosis [Danziger]. Citrobacter is found in the genitourinary tract, the respiratory tract, and has been identified in intraabdominal, soft tissue and bone infections [Donnenberg].
The other diagnostic possibilities listed in the differential were far less likely given the clinical course and CT findings. Pancreatitis may cause epigastric or diffuse abdominal pain; however, with normal levels of amylase and lipase as seen in this case, this diagnosis was unlikely. Distension of the gallbladder, seen on the CT scan, may occur after periods of anorexia and decreased oral intake and can be a normal finding; no gallstones or other specific findings of cholecystitis were seen. The examination made no mention of pain with the inguinal hernia, and the CT scan did not show dilated loops of bowel suggestive of an obstruction, and therefore incarceration of the bowel was also unlikely.
Final Diagnosis
Acute appendicitis, with bacteremia caused by Eikenella corrodens and Citrobacter freundii, and post-operative wound infection by Eikenella.
References
Carr, N.J. (2000). The pathology of acute appendicitis. Ann Diagn Pathol 4, 46-58
PMID:10684382(PubMed abstract) Danziger, L.H., Schoonover, L.L., Kale, P., and Resnick, D.J. (1994). Eikenella corrodens as an intra-abdominal pathogen. Am Surg 60, 296-299
PMID:8129254(PubMed abstract) Donnenberg MS. Chapter 215, Enterobacteriaceae (Citrobacter Species) in Mandell G, Bennett J, Dolin R, Edition 6, 2005. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, p 2580 Marchildon, M.B., and Dudgeon, D.L. (1977). Perforated appendicitis: current experience in a Childrens Hospital. Ann Surg 185, 84-87.
PMID:831639(PubMed abstract) Sifri CD and Madoff LC, Chapter 72 Appendicitis, in Mandell G, Bennett J, Dolin R, Edition 6, 2005. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, pp 968-971 Steinberg JP and DelRio C, Chapter 234, Other Gram-Negative and Gram-Variable Bacilli, in Mandell G, Bennett J, Dolin R, Edition 6, 2005. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, pp2758-2759
Carr, N.J. (2000). The pathology of acute appendicitis. Ann Diagn Pathol 4, 46-58
PMID:10684382(PubMed abstract)
Danziger, L.H., Schoonover, L.L., Kale, P., and Resnick, D.J. (1994). Eikenella corrodens as an intra-abdominal pathogen. Am Surg 60, 296-299
PMID:8129254(PubMed abstract)
Donnenberg MS. Chapter 215, Enterobacteriaceae (Citrobacter Species) in Mandell G, Bennett J, Dolin R, Edition 6, 2005. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, p 2580
Marchildon, M.B., and Dudgeon, D.L. (1977). Perforated appendicitis: current experience in a Childrens Hospital. Ann Surg 185, 84-87.
PMID:831639(PubMed abstract)
Sifri CD and Madoff LC, Chapter 72 Appendicitis, in Mandell G, Bennett J, Dolin R, Edition 6, 2005. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, pp 968-971
Steinberg JP and DelRio C, Chapter 234, Other Gram-Negative and Gram-Variable Bacilli, in Mandell G, Bennett J, Dolin R, Edition 6, 2005. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, pp2758-2759
