History of Present Illness
2007 October Featured Case and IDSA 2007 Fellows Day Case Presentation Summary: A man with dyspnea, weight loss, back pain and weakness.
A man in his sixties presented to the Pulmonary Clinic for evaluation of a possible lung primary carcinoma. Three days before admission, he developed fatigue, exertional dyspnea, decreased oral intake with constipation, low back pain, lower extremity weakness and difficulty ambulating. During the preceding 2 months, anorexia developed and his weight decreased 10-pounds. There were no fevers, chills, nausea, or abdominal pain.
Past Medical History
The past medical history included an orthotopic heart transplantation and excision of a cerebellar tumor, which had been positive for metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of unknown primary site. Other past medical history included coronary artery disease, hypertension, deep venous thrombosis, diverticulosis, internal hemorrhoids, and basal cell carcinoma of the occipital scalp.
Medications
Medications included mycophenolate 500 mg twice a day, cyclosporine 75 mg every morning and 100 mg every evening, dexamethasone 2 mg every 6 hours, ranitidine, warfarin, and oxycodone 5 mg as needed every 6 hours. All medications were taken orally.
Allergies
There were no allergies to medications.
Epidemiological History
The patient had a 96 pack-year smoking history.
Physical Examination
He appeared well. The blood pressure was 120/81 mm Hg, pulse 111 beats per minute, respirations 24 breaths per minute, and temperature 98.1°F (36.7°C). Edema and proximal muscle weakness of legs were present bilaterally. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white cell count was 5,600 cells/mm³ (48% bands, 40% neutrophils, 10% lymphocytes). Laboratory test results of a metabolic panel revealed a bicarbonate level of 20 mmol/L, and were otherwise normal. A radiograph of the chest revealed clear lungs (Figure 1). An abdominal radiograph (upright) revealed free air in the peritoneum beneath the diaphragms (Figure 2).
Figure 1. Chest radiograph on admission.
Figure 2. Radiograph of the abdomen, with free air beneath the diaphragms.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Ticarcillin-clavulanate was administered intravenously, and a laparotomy was performed emergently, which revealed a perforation of the colon with stool in the left lower quadrant. Resection of the sigmoid colon with an end-colostomy and Hartmann’s pouch was performed. The resected colon was sent for pathological examination, shown in Figures 3 and 4.
Figure 3. H and E stain of resected sigmoid colon.
Figure 4. H and E stain of resected sigmoid colon.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The diagnosis was obtained by histological and immunohistochemical staining of the resected colon and cytomegalovirus (CMV) deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) performed on the plasma. Pathological examination by hematoxylin and eosin staining (Figure 3) shows a ruptured diverticulum with inflammation and perforation into mesenteric adipose tissue. No muscularis mucosa was identified in this section, with the mucosa directly adjacent to mesenteric adipose tissue, confirming diverticular disease. Figures 4 and 5 show mixed inflammatory cells in the background, with lymphocytes and neutrophils seen. In the center, there is a large CMV inclusion cell (Figure 5, see arrows), with nuclear and cytoplasmic inclusions. The cytoplasm is distended with eosinophilic inclusions and the nucleus is enlarged with a single basophilic inclusion. There is a clear halo surrounding the nucleus, and no multinucleations are seen.
Figure 6 shows immunohistochemical staining with antibody specific to CMV antigen. The patient’s plasma CMV DNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was 106,655 copies/ml.
Figure 5. H and E stain of colon, showing giant cell (arrows).
Figure 6. Immunohistochemical staining of colon specimen for CMV.
Treatment and Followup
Ticarcillin-clavulanate was administered intravenously for 7 days, followed by oral amoxicillin-clavulanate for an additional 7 days. The patient also received intravenous ganciclovir at a dose of 5 mg/kg every 12 hours for 3 weeks until the CMV DNA PCR was undetectable; then oral valganciclovir was given. The patient did well and was discharged to a temporary rehabilitation facility, and follow up as an outpatient was scheduled with the Infectious Diseases Clinic.
Discussion
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is the viral infection that occurs most frequently after solid organ transplantation, and an increased level of immunosuppression escalates the risk of reactivation disease.
Patients may present with constitutional symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, as well as symptoms localizing to the involved organ, such as those of pneumonitis or colitis.
In those who develop CMV disease after solid organ transplantation, the gastrointestinal tract is involved in 10% to 30% of cases. CMV infection of the gastrointestinal tract usually presents as bleeding due to ulceration and diffuse mucosal irritation, but only rarely presents as a perforation of the viscera.
The increased risk of colonic perforation in patients with diverticulitis who are taking steroids has been recognized since 1950. Steroids mask clinical signs of peritonitis in cases of colonic perforation, and the patients may present with a normal abdominal examination. Delay in diagnosis by more than 24 hours doubles the already high mortality from 30% to 60%, even in current series. A high index of suspicion is necessary to diagnose perforation of the viscera in patients on immunosuppressive therapy.
Final Diagnosis
Cytomegalovirus colitis and diverticulitis with perforation in a patient status post solid organ transplantation.
References
Gautam, A. (2006). Gastrointestinal complications following transplantation. Surg Clin North Am 86, 1195-1206, vii.
PMID:16962409(PubMed abstract) Pirenne, J., Lledo-Garcia, E., Benedetti, E., West, M., Hakim, N.S., Sutherland, D.E., Gruessner, R.W., Najarian, J.S., and Matas, A.J. (1997). Colon perforation after renal transplantation: a single-institution review. Clin Transplant 11, 88-93.
PMID:9113442(PubMed abstract) Tyau, E.S., Prystowsky, J.B., Joehl, R.J., and Nahrwold, D.L. (1991). Acute diverticulitis. A complicated problem in the immunocompromised patient. Arch Surg 126, 855-858; discussion 858-859.
PMID:1854245(PubMed abstract)
Gautam, A. (2006). Gastrointestinal complications following transplantation. Surg Clin North Am 86, 1195-1206, vii.
PMID:16962409(PubMed abstract)
Pirenne, J., Lledo-Garcia, E., Benedetti, E., West, M., Hakim, N.S., Sutherland, D.E., Gruessner, R.W., Najarian, J.S., and Matas, A.J. (1997). Colon perforation after renal transplantation: a single-institution review. Clin Transplant 11, 88-93.
PMID:9113442(PubMed abstract)
Tyau, E.S., Prystowsky, J.B., Joehl, R.J., and Nahrwold, D.L. (1991). Acute diverticulitis. A complicated problem in the immunocompromised patient. Arch Surg 126, 855-858; discussion 858-859.
PMID:1854245(PubMed abstract)
