History of Present Illness
IDSA 2002 Case and Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A woman with a skin lesion for four weeks.
A woman in her twenties presented to an emergency department in the Northeast United States with a skin lesion on her right shoulder of four weeks' duration. The patient had noticed the skin lesion two days after she returned to the United States from Peru. The lesion started out as a raised papule that enlarged over several weeks. It did not itch and was not painful. She reported no history of fever, chills or night sweats.
Past Medical History
None.
Medications
None.
Epidemiological History
She had spent six weeks in the rainforest of Peru. A companion, who had been with her at the time, had a similar skin lesion.
Physical Examination
She appeared well and was afebrile. There was a skin lesion on her right shoulder (see Figure 1) and the remainder of the examination was normal, with no lymphadenopathy.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Studies
Results of laboratory tests of the blood were normal.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Pathological examination of a skin biopsy included a Giemsa-stained slide of a tissue touch prep, which showed amastigotes inside macrophages consistent with leishmaniasis. (See Figure 2.)
Figure 2. Giemsa stain skin biopsy.
Treatment and Followup
Culture of the specimen developed an overgrowth of yeast, and failed to grow any other organisms. Her colleague’s skin biopsy grew Leishmania braziliensis. The patient was treated intravenously for 20 days with antimony in the form of sodium stibogluconate (Pentostam) provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The patient tolerated the medication well. She had mild muscle aches and a transient rise in liver function studies, amylase and lipase developed, all of which normalized after cessation of therapy. The skin lesion markedly decreased in size and subsequently scarred over.
Discussion
Leishmania braziliensis is transmitted by the bite of an infected female sandfly. Other modes of transmission are congenital and parenteral (by blood transfusion, needle sharing and laboratory accident). Cutaneous leishmaniasis may heal without treatment. Systemic treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis is thought, but not proven, to decrease the already low risk (<5%) of mucosal disease.
Final Diagnosis
Cutaneous leishmaniasis due to Leishmania braziliensis.
References
