History of Present Illness
Summary: An African woman with a rash.
A woman in her thirties complained of a rash for one month. She reported no other symptoms; in particular, she denied fever, chills or sweats.
Past Medical History
None.
Medications
None.
Epidemiological History
The patient lived in South Africa.
Physical Examination
The patient was well-appearing and afebrile. There was generalized lymphadenopathy. She had an eruption of papules involving the extensors of the arms and pinna of the ears, sparing the rest of the face (Figures 1 and 2). The lesions on the legs and shins were necrotic (Figure 3). The remainder of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Figure 2. Lesions on pinna.
Figure 3. Necrotic leg lesions.
Studies
An antibody test for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was positive. Routine laboratory tests were normal, as was a chest radiograph. A Mantoux skin test revealed induration that measured 15mm by 15mm, with blistering (Figure 4).
Figure 4. Mantoux test result.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Pathologic examination of a skin biopsy showed a crust with a granulomatous infiltrate that was perifollicular. There was also evidence of vasculitis. Special stains for fungi and acid-fast bacilli (AFB) were negative.
Treatment and Followup
Full anti-tuberculosis therapy was administered for 6 months.
Discussion
Papulonecrotic tuberculid is a symmetric eruption of necrotizing papules, generally on the extensor surfaces of the extremities. The crops of papules may develop central necrosis, forming an ulcer. Most patients with papulonecrotic tuberculids have a positive Mantoux test. About one-third has a deep-sited focus of tuberculosis. In others, tuberculids may represent a hypersensitivity reaction to mycobacteria. A granulomatous vasculitis with thrombosis of blood vessels is a characteristic finding. The obliteration of the vasculature leads to a wedged-shaped area of necrosis of the dermis and epidermis.
This condition is more common in areas where tuberculosis caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis is highly prevalent, such as South Africa. Generally, there is a prompt response of the rash to anti-tuberculous therapy.
Final Diagnosis
Papulonecrotic tuberculid in an African patient with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
References
