History of Present Illness
Summary: A middle-aged man with headache and left-handed clumsiness.
A right-handed male in his forties presented with two weeks of a severe headache that had originated on the right but had become bifrontal, and two days of left-handed clumsiness.
Past Medical History
There was a history of migraines for many years and Hepatitis C virus infection.
Medications
Medications included ibuprofen and acetaminophen-oxycodone had been given for his headaches, without relief.
Epidemiological History
He lived on the United States Northeast coast with his female partner, and traveled yearly to Asia. There was a remote history of intravenous drug use several decades earlier, but none since. He denied smoking or alcohol use, pets, unusual hobbies, recent dental work or oral infections.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared acutely ill. The temperature was 100.2°F (37.9°C), heart rate 108 beats/minute, blood pressure 110/88 mm Hg, and respiratory rate 14/minute. His pupils were equal and reactive to light; fundoscopic examination revealed sharp discs bilaterally, and the tympanic membranes were clear bilaterally. There was no sinus tenderness, tooth tenderness or gingivitis noted. His neck was supple and there was no lymphadenopathy. The S1, S2 heart sounds were normal, with no murmur. Examination of the lungs, abdomen and skin were normal. He was fully oriented with fluent speech, but had diminished attention and impaired immediate recall (1/3 objects). Cranial nerves were intact and symmetric, and there were no motor or sensory deficits. He declined a more detailed neurological examination.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 6,300 cells/mm³, with 85% polys, 13% lymphs, 1% monos, and 1% eosinophils. The level of aspartate aminotransferase (AST/SGOT) was 44 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT/SGPT) 69 U/L, and alkaline phosphatase 44 U/L. The remainder of his laboratory test results were normal. His chest radiograph was clear. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a, heterogeneous, rim-enhancing lesion (4 centimeter (cm) by 5 cm by 5 cm) with surrounding edema within the right parietal lobe (Figures 1 and 2). There was mass effect on the lateral ventricle with early entrapment of the frontal horn.
Figure 1. Head MRI scan.
Figure 2. Head MRI scan.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The patient was taken to the operating room where a right-sided craniotomy was performed. At least 15cc of pus were evacuated from a fluctuant lesion in the right temporo-parietal region. The cavity was irrigated copiously and empiric ceftriaxone and metronidazole were begun based on a gram stain of the fluid, which revealed moderate polys, few gram-positive cocci in pairs, few gram-negative rods, and few short gram-positive rods (Figures 3 and 4). The aerobic culture grew abundant Haemophilus aphrophilus and Actinomyces odontolyticus. The anaerobic culture grew abundant Peptostreptococcus micros.
Figure 3. Gram stain of the aspirate.
Figure 4. Gram stain of the aspirate.
Treatment and Followup
The patient’s headache improved dramatically, and he felt neurologically back to baseline the day following surgery. His complete neurological exam at that time was normal. He underwent a thorough otolaryngological and oral surgery evaluation, which showed no sinus or odontogenic infection. He had a transesophageal echocardiogram that revealed a patent foramen ovale without evidence for endocarditis.
The aerobic culture grew abundant Haemophilus aphrophilus and Actinomyces odontolyticus. The anaerobic culture grew abundant Peptostreptococcus micros. He completed eight weeks of intravenous ceftriaxone (1gm every 12 hours) and penicillin G (4MU every four hours), followed by penicillin 500mg and probenicid 500mg orally four times daily in order to complete a yearlong course. A follow-up computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain performed 3 months after initial presentation revealed near complete resolution of the brain abscess with only minimal enhancement (Figure 5).
Figure 5. Follow-up head CT scan at three months.
Discussion
Brain abscesses can be caused by organisms reaching the brain by either the hematogenous route, direct spread from a contiguous site, or trauma or post-surgical circumstances. The bacterial species found in this patient’s brain abscess suggest an odontogenic source despite the fact he could not recall any dental infection or even recent teeth cleaning. Approximately 30% of brain abscesses occur without an obvious source or underlying condition. The clinical manifestations of brain abscesses are nonspecific such that the average duration of symptoms is 14 days prior to the diagnosis being made. Headache is the most common symptom whereas fever and/or neurological deficits are only present in 50% of patients. Diagnosis is made by CT or MRI scan in the appropriate clinical setting. Treatment consists of empiric therapy based on the probable pathogens and, usually, surgical drainage. Antibiotics are continued for 6-8 weeks with close follow-up after their discontinuation. The decision to treat this patient for one year with oral penicillin following his intravenous course was based on the isolation of Actinomyces, a particularly slow-growing bacteria, which typically requires months of therapy to fully eradicate.
Final Diagnosis
Polymicrobial brain abscess in a patient with hepatitis C virus infection.
References
Carpenter, J., Stapleton, S., and Holliman, R. (2007). Retrospective analysis of 49 cases of brain abscess and review of the literature. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 26, 1-11.
PMID:17180609(PubMed abstract) Roche, M., Humphreys, H., Smyth, E., Phillips, J., Cunney, R., McNamara, E., O'Brien, D., and McArdle, O. (2003). A twelve-year review of central nervous system bacterial abscesses; presentation and aetiology. Clin Microbiol Infect 9, 803-809.
PMID:14616700(PubMed abstract)
Carpenter, J., Stapleton, S., and Holliman, R. (2007). Retrospective analysis of 49 cases of brain abscess and review of the literature. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 26, 1-11.
PMID:17180609(PubMed abstract)
Roche, M., Humphreys, H., Smyth, E., Phillips, J., Cunney, R., McNamara, E., O'Brien, D., and McArdle, O. (2003). A twelve-year review of central nervous system bacterial abscesses; presentation and aetiology. Clin Microbiol Infect 9, 803-809.
PMID:14616700(PubMed abstract)
