History of Present Illness
IDSA 2007 Fellows Day Case Submission Summary: A man with HIV infection, weakness and confusion.
A man in his sixties, with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, developed changes in mental status, decreased oral intake, and generalized weakness.
One month earlier, he had been admitted to the hospital with pneumonia. Antibiotics were administered, with no improvement. Bronchoscopy was performed and Pneumocystis pneumonia diagnosed. Subsequent test results revealed antibody to human immunodeficiency virus, the CD4 cell count was 12 cells per microliter (6%) and HIV-RNA level was 389,000 copies/mL. Additional laboratory test results were negative, including testing for syphilis, hepatitis B and C antibodies, blood cultures for acid-fast bacilli, serum cryptococcal antigen, and toxoplasma antibody. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head, performed with gadolinium, showed no abnormalities. He was transferred to a skilled nursing facility for assistance with activities of daily living.
One month later, worsening mental status and increased fatigue developed, and he was no longer ingesting his medications. He was re-admitted to the hospital for further evaluation. On admission, a relative reported he had had weight loss of 50 pounds (approximately 23 kilograms) over three months.
Past Medical History
There was a history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and, as noted above, HIV infection. Four months before admission, colonoscopy had been normal.
Medications
Medications included dapsone and azithromycin.
Allergies
The patient was allergic to sulfa drugs, which had caused leukopenia.
Social History
He was retired and married.
Epidemiological History
He had no known risk factors for HIV infection. He had smoked cigarettes in the past; there was no history of alcohol or intravenous drug abuse. He had no pets, hobbies, or recent travel.
Physical Examination
The patient was cachectic, and appeared comfortable. He was awake, alert, but not oriented. The blood pressure was 136/72 mm Hg, pulse 100 beats per minute, respirations 21 per minute, with an oxygen saturation of 97% while breathing ambient air. The temperature was 97.1ºF (36.2ºC). Examination of the oropharynx revealed white plaques on the tongue and palate. The patient was unable to cooperate with a complete neurologic examination, however cranial nerves were grossly intact, and motor strength was 4/5 in general. Gait was not tested. There was no lymphadenopathy or skin lesions, and the remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white cell count was 4,400 cells/microliter (neutrophils 69%, lymphocytes 19%, monocytes 11%, and eosinophils 1%), hemoglobin 9.4 grams per deciliter, and platelets 77,000/microliter. No schistocytes were present on blood smear. The plasma level of urea nitrogen was 92 mg/dL, creatinine 3.0 mg/dL, and glucose 471 mg/dL. Repeat CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count was 58 cells/microliter (8%) and the level of HIV-RNA was 388,000 copies/mL.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed age-related atrophy and some periventricular changes. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed one white cell, which was a lymphocyte, protein 123 mg/dL, and glucose of 154 mg/dl. Testing of the CSF for syphilis (Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test), cryptococcal antigen, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for herpes simplex virus was negative. MRI of the head, compared with the study done one month earlier, revealed age-related atrophy and small vessel disease; there was no evidence of acute infection or mass effect. Three sets of blood cultures were negative. The blood cultures for acid-fast bacilli (drawn during the previous admission) remained negative.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The metabolic laboratory abnormalities corrected with intravenous fluid hydration. His mental status improved; he became more alert but remained disoriented. A diagnosis of AIDS dementia was suspected, and initiation of antiretroviral medication was planned after resolution of his acute issues. Dapsone and azithromycin were continued for Pneumocystis and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) prophylaxis, respectively, and pyrimethamine with leucovorin added for toxoplasmosis prophylaxis. On the 5th hospital day, oxygen saturation by pulse oximeter decreased to 86% on ambient air. A sonogram of the lower extremities revealed an acute deep venous thrombosis of the right leg. CT of the chest revealed multiple pulmonary emboli. CT of the abdomen and pelvis showed an annular constricting mass of the ascending colon with marked narrowing of the lumen, which was thought to be consistent with carcinoma. The liver was normal. (See Figure 1, with arrow pointing to the annular mass.) Laboratory testing of carcinoembryonic antigen was normal (1.1 ng/mL). Colonoscopy was performed to the terminal ileum without difficulty. There was erythema and ulceration noted in the cecum near the ileocecal valve. The region of the ileocecal valve was edematous with erythema and ulceration on the mucosal surface; a biopsy was taken at this site (see Figure 2).
Figure 1. CT of the abdomen, with annular mass.
Figure 2. H and E stain of the ileocecal valve biopsy.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Pathological examination of the biopsy revealed enlarged cells with nuclei containing structures suspicious for inclusion bodies (Figure 2). Immunohistochemical staining was positive for cytomegalovirus (Figure 3). Sections of cecum also showed an ulcerated focus with features suggestive of ischemia, surface erosion, and crypt atrophy; these findings were thought to be consistent with cytomegalovirus-induced vascular injury. Cytomegalovirus-associated pseudotumor of the colon was diagnosed.
Figure 3. Immunohistochemical stain of the biopsy.
Treatment and Followup
Intravenous ganciclovir (5mg/kg twice daily) was administered. Ophthalmology was consulted; there was no evidence of retinitis. The patient underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube placement; no esophageal lesions were seen. On the 12th day of ganciclovir therapy, the patient experienced vomiting and a sudden decrease in his hemoglobin. Later that evening. the patient was found without pulse or respirations, and expired. No postmortem examination was performed.
Discussion
Mass lesions in the gastrointestinal tract of immunocompromised patients can be caused by Kaposi’s sarcoma (60%), non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (35%), squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, or other sarcomas, but are rarely due to infectious pathogens such as cytomegalovirus (CMV). Cytomegalovirus intestinal disease is an erosive or ulcerative process in the wall of the gut in which the presence of CMV is shown by routine histologic exam, culture, antigen, or DNA staining, in a person in whom other explanations have been excluded. There are few case reports of pseudotumors of the gastrointestinal tract secondary to CMV. They have been reported as lesions of the right colon and ileocecal region, and less commonly as involving the esophagus, fundus, and pylorus. A mass lesion forms as result of CMV-induced stromal reactivity, vasculitic changes, inflammatory cell infiltration, and eventual fibrous replacement of the muscularis mucosa, leading to an exophytic luminal mass. Clinical presentation is often nonspecific, but patients may report abdominal pain, fever, and diarrhea. Less commonly, patients can present with obstruction of the gastrointestinal tract or a palpable mass. Pathological examination of the lesions reveals classic cytomegalic cells with inclusion bodies, fibrosis, necrosis, and a positive immunoperoxidase stain. At the time of this writing, treatment is with ganciclovir induction therapy for two to three weeks followed by a maintenance dose. Foscarnet is an alternative for patients who cannot tolerate ganciclovir. Surgery is reserved for patients presenting with evidence of intestinal obstruction.
Final Diagnosis
Cytomegalovirus-associated pseudotumor of the colon, in a patient with HIV and AIDS.
References
Danzig, J.B., Brandt, L.J., Reinus, J.F., and Klein, R.S. (1991). Gastrointestinal malignancy in patients with AIDS. Am J Gastroenterol 86, 715-718.
PMID:2038993(PubMed abstract) Genta, R.M., Bleyzer, I., Cate, T.R., Tandon, A.K., and Yoffe, B. (1993). In situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis of cytomegalovirus-associated ileal perforation. Gastroenterology 104, 1822-1827
PMID:8388840(PubMed abstract) Goodgame, R.W. (1993). Gastrointestinal cytomegalovirus disease. Ann Intern Med 119, 924-935.
PMID:8215005(PubMed abstract) Renu, SG et al. Cytomegalovirus infection in AIDS presenting as a rectal mass. Am J Gastro 2000; 95: 1. Rich, J.D., Crawford, J.M., Kazanjian, S.N., and Kazanjian, P.H. (1992). Discrete gastrointestinal mass lesions caused by cytomegalovirus in patients with AIDS: report of three cases and review. Clin Infect Dis 15, 609-614.
PMID:1330013(PubMed abstract) Swansiger, B., and Orchard, J.L. (1996). A colonic mass lesion due to cytomegalovirus in an immunocompromised patient. J Clin Gastroenterol 22, 41-44.
PMID:8776095(PubMed abstract)
Danzig, J.B., Brandt, L.J., Reinus, J.F., and Klein, R.S. (1991). Gastrointestinal malignancy in patients with AIDS. Am J Gastroenterol 86, 715-718.
PMID:2038993(PubMed abstract)
Genta, R.M., Bleyzer, I., Cate, T.R., Tandon, A.K., and Yoffe, B. (1993). In situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis of cytomegalovirus-associated ileal perforation. Gastroenterology 104, 1822-1827
PMID:8388840(PubMed abstract)
Goodgame, R.W. (1993). Gastrointestinal cytomegalovirus disease. Ann Intern Med 119, 924-935.
PMID:8215005(PubMed abstract)
Renu, SG et al. Cytomegalovirus infection in AIDS presenting as a rectal mass. Am J Gastro 2000; 95: 1.
Rich, J.D., Crawford, J.M., Kazanjian, S.N., and Kazanjian, P.H. (1992). Discrete gastrointestinal mass lesions caused by cytomegalovirus in patients with AIDS: report of three cases and review. Clin Infect Dis 15, 609-614.
PMID:1330013(PubMed abstract)
Swansiger, B., and Orchard, J.L. (1996). A colonic mass lesion due to cytomegalovirus in an immunocompromised patient. J Clin Gastroenterol 22, 41-44.
PMID:8776095(PubMed abstract)
