History of Present Illness
Summary: A man with chest wall pain and induration after a dog bite.
A man in his forties presented with one week of chest wall pain, redness, swelling and induration. The pain had started in the right axilla and then moved into the chest wall and abdomen.
Three weeks before his presentation, he had suffered a dog bite that had punctured the skin of his right hand. He did not seek medical care or notice any signs of infection at the time.
Past Medical History
He had a history of childhood polio.
Epidemiological History
He was originally from Puerto Rico, and had lived in United States for the previous ten years.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared ill. The temperature was 102°F (38.9°C), pulse 124 beats per minute; the other vital signs were normal. There was a soft tissue abscess in the right chest wall that extended into the right axilla and mid abdominal wall. (See Figure 1 for appearance after incision and drainage procedure.) The remainder of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Physical findings after initial incision and drainage.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 15,300 cells/mm³ with 71% polymorphonuclear leukocytes and 16% band formss. Computed tomography (CT) scanning of the chest showed a soft tissue mass consistent with an abscess in the subpectoralis area (Figure 2).
Figure 2. CT scan of the chest.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was started on vancomycin and ampicillin-sulbactam intravenously. The soft tissue mass was incised and revealed a purulent discharge that was sent for stains and cultures. The gram stain is shown in Figure 3. A biopsy of the fascia showed no evidence of necrotizing fasciitis.
Figure 3. Gram stain of purulent discharge.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Culture of the purulent discharge grew Pasteurella multocida (Figure 3).
Treatment and Followup
The patient went to the operating room where the surgeons found 600 cubic centimeters of purulent material. Intravenous penicillin was administered for two weeks and was followed by oral amoxicillin. On follow-up, the patient was doing very well.
Discussion
Pasteurella multocida is a gram-negative aerobic rod that is frequently isolated from infected dog or cat bite wounds. Characteristically, infections by Pasteurella species become symptomatic during the first 24 hours after the injury. Symptoms include erythema, swelling, tenderness and drainage at the site of the bite.
Infections due to Pasteurella most often remain localized to the inoculated wound with cellulitis and abscesses. Direct extension to surrounding tissues may lead to lymphangitis and regional lymphadenopathy. Bacteremia may occur with metastatic foci including osteomyelitis, arthritis, tenosynovitis, sepsis, meningitis, brain abscess, pneumonia and endocarditis. Pasteurella multocida bacteremia is associated with cirrhosis, diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, hematologic malignancies, neoplasms and immunosuppression.
Penicillin is the drug of choice for P. multocida infections. Ampicillin and amoxicillin-clavulanate also offer adequate activity. Cefuroxime and cefpodoxime have better in vitro activity against Pasteurella species than other cephalosporins. Nafcillin, dicloxacillin, cefazolin, cefaclor, cefadroxil, and cephalexin have inadequate activity against most strains of Pasteurella species. Clindamycin and the aminoglycosides have poor activity against Pasteurella spp.
Final Diagnosis
Soft tissue abscess secondary to Pasteurella multocida infection, following a dog bite.
References
Brook, I. (2009). Management of human and animal bite wound infection: an overview. Curr Infect Dis Rep 11, 389-395.
PMID:19698283(PubMed abstract) Oehler, R.L., Velez, A.P., Mizrachi, M., Lamarche, J., and Gompf, S. (2009). Bite-related and septic syndromes caused by cats and dogs. Lancet Infect Dis 9, 439-447.
PMID:19555903(PubMed abstract) Talan, D.A., Citron, D.M., Abrahamian, F.M., Moran, G.J., and Goldstein, E.J. (1999). Bacteriologic analysis of infected dog and cat bites. Emergency Medicine Animal Bite Infection Study Group. N Engl J Med 340, 85-92.
PMID:9887159(PubMed abstract)
Brook, I. (2009). Management of human and animal bite wound infection: an overview. Curr Infect Dis Rep 11, 389-395.
PMID:19698283(PubMed abstract)
Oehler, R.L., Velez, A.P., Mizrachi, M., Lamarche, J., and Gompf, S. (2009). Bite-related and septic syndromes caused by cats and dogs. Lancet Infect Dis 9, 439-447.
PMID:19555903(PubMed abstract)
Talan, D.A., Citron, D.M., Abrahamian, F.M., Moran, G.J., and Goldstein, E.J. (1999). Bacteriologic analysis of infected dog and cat bites. Emergency Medicine Animal Bite Infection Study Group. N Engl J Med 340, 85-92.
PMID:9887159(PubMed abstract)
