History of Present Illness
Summary: A woman with an expressive aphasia and right-sided weakness.
A middle-aged woman presented with word-finding difficulties, expressive aphasia and right upper extremity weakness that had developed gradually over the preceding four weeks.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed T2 intensity in a left frontoparietal subcortical white matter lesion, without edema or enhancement. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was normal without oligoclonal bands; and serologic testing for syphilis and Lyme were negative. Magnetic-resonance angiography (MRA) was negative for stroke.
The patient was treated empirically with steroids for presumed multiple sclerosis with mild improvement initially. However, she presented again a few days later with worsening aphasia and weakness. MRI scanning was repeated and showed a larger left frontoparietal lesion with additional lesions in the pons. She denied headaches, eye pain, visual changes, vertigo, dizziness, fevers, chills, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea.
Past Medical History
The patient was healthy until four weeks before her presentation.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared thin and cachectic. She was afebrile and the vital signs were normal. Thrush was present on the tongue and hard palate. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy. Examinations of the fundi, lungs, heart and abdomen were normal. There was no rash on the skin. The patient was alert and oriented. She was able to follow simple commands but was not able to speak in long sentences or execute complex tasks. She had echolalia and could not name objects. Her strength was 5- out of 5 in right upper and lower extremities and 5 out of 5 in left extremities. Cranial nerves were intact, reflexes were brisk and symmetrical, and the toes were downgoing.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 2,200/mm³ with 44% neutrophils and 45% lymphocytes, platelets were 188,000/mm³. The total protein was 7.3 g/dL and globulin 3.7 g/dL; the level of creatinine and liver function tests were normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed multiple foci of abnormal T2 signal involving the white matter in the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes, with the largest abnormality seen in the left frontal lobe (Figures 1 and 2). There was minimal enhancement after contrast and no mass effect was seen. There was no evidence of a tissue mass in the left frontal lobe.
Figure 1. MRI scan of the brain, axial T2-weighted image.
Figure 2. MRI scan of the brain, axial T2-weighted image (higher cut).
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Her speech and strength did not improve. An electroencephalogram (EEG) showed abnormal brain activity in the left frontal area.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Subsequent evaluation revealed a positive antibody test for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count was 20 cells/mm³ and the level of HIV RNA was 182,000 copies/mL. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed no pleocytosis and a positive JC virus PCR test was consistent with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). The CSF HIV RNA was 21,000 copies/mL.
MRI scanning T2 images, shown in Figures 1 and 2, reveal subcortical white matter disease in the left frontoparietal lobe. (Figure 1 is a lower cut than Figure 2.)
Treatment and Followup
The patient was started on combination therapy that included zidovudine (AZT), lamivudine (3TC), and lopinavir-ritonavir with a decrease in the HIV RNA level and increase in the CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count. The neurologic examination improved over the subsequent three months.
Discussion
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is caused by JC virus (JCV). The infection reactivates and invades glial cells in patients who are immunosuppressed. The diagnosis is made by either histology or establishing the presence of JCV in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by PCR.
The classic appearance of PML on MRI scanning is that of multiple foci of T2 intensity involving only the white matter, without mass effect and with no or minimal enhancement. All patients who have the typical radiologic findings should be tested for HIV infection. Most patient who have PML as a result of HIV are usually very immunosuppressed with CD4 cell counts of less than 50 cells/mm³. Other risk factors for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in addition to HIV infection include hematologic malignancy, and immunomodulatory medications (such as natalizumab or rituxamab). Patients often present with rapidly progressive focal neurologic deficits, usually due to cerebral white matter disease.
The treatment for this disease is directed at reversing the underlying immunosuppression. In cases of HIV-related PML, antiretroviral therapy may result in improvement of the neurologic disease.
This patient was unlikely to have an arboviral infection, such as West Nile Virus encephalitis, because of the absence of features such as confusion, headache, meningeal signs or symptoms, or paralysis. Herpes simplex virus infection typically involves the temporal lobe, and septic cerebral emboli would have been associated with more radiological enhancement.
Final Diagnosis
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) in a patient with advanced human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.
References
Simpson, D.M. (2011). HIV-associated PML: changing epidemiology and clinical approach. Cleve Clin J Med 78 Suppl 2, S24-27.
PMID:22123930(PubMed abstract) Tan, C.S., and Koralnik, I.J. (2010). Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy and other disorders caused by JC virus: clinical features and pathogenesis. Lancet Neurol 9, 425-437.
PMID:20298966(PubMed abstract)
Simpson, D.M. (2011). HIV-associated PML: changing epidemiology and clinical approach. Cleve Clin J Med 78 Suppl 2, S24-27.
PMID:22123930(PubMed abstract)
Tan, C.S., and Koralnik, I.J. (2010). Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy and other disorders caused by JC virus: clinical features and pathogenesis. Lancet Neurol 9, 425-437.
PMID:20298966(PubMed abstract)
