History of Present Illness
2009 IDSA Pediatric Fellows' Day Case Presentation Summary: A teenaged boy with fever, headache, and suprapubic and left clavicular pain.
A teenaged boy had been well until 2 weeks before admission, when fever developed, associated with chills, intermittent frontotemporal headache, myalgias, and suprapubic and left clavicular pain. He also reported a transient diffuse, non-pruritic, erythematous macular rash that had spared his palms, and resolved. Initial screening tests, including cultures of the blood and urine, and plain radiographs of the abdomen and left shoulder were normal.
Medications
Medications included ibuprofen as needed for fevers or headache.
Allergies
He had no known drug allergies.
Epidemiological History
He lived with his parents and siblings in the midwestern United States. He did not smoke, drink alcohol, or use illicit drugs, and was not sexually active. Household pets included dogs, a rabbit, and rats. A pet cockatiel had died one month before admission.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared mildly ill and fatigued. The temperature was 40°C (104.0°F), blood pressure 99/45 mm Hg, pulse 140 beats per minute, and respirations 16 times per minute. The lips were dry, without oral lesions. There was a harsh 3/6 systolic ejection murmur at the right upper sternal border, a 2/6 vibratory systolic murmur at the left lower sternal border, and a 2/4 diastolic decrescendo murmur. There was no evidence of peripheral embolic phenomena or rash. The suprapubic region of the abdomen was mildly tender, without guarding or rebound tenderness.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 20,300 cells per cubic millimeter (reference range 4,500-13,500), with segmented neutrophils 80% (ref 39-75), band forms 12% (ref 5-11), lymphocytes 4% (ref 28-48), monocytes 3% (ref 2-8) and eosinophils 1% (1-4).
A transesophageal echocardiogram revealed a large aortic valve vegetation and severe aortic regurgitation, as well as an apparent right atrial mass (Figures 1 and 2).
Figure 1. Echocardiography.
Figure 2. Echocardiography.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Gram stains of growth from an anaerobic blood culture, with sodium polyanethol sulfonate (SPS) activity inhibited by addition of gelatin to the media, are shown in Figures 3 and 4.
Results of a bone scan were negative. Ampicillin-sulbactam and gentamicin were administered, and the temperatures returned to normal. Shortly thereafter, the ampicillin-sulbactam was changed to penicillin.
Despite antibiotic therapy, his clinical condition worsened. He developed respiratory distress, severe hypotension and severe aortic regurgitation, which required emergent operative intervention.
Figure 3. Gram stain of growth from anaerobic bottle, 100x magnification.
Figure 4. Gram stain of growth from anaerobic bottle, 100x magnification.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Multiple anaerobic blood cultures with media that did not contain sodium polyanethol sulfonate (SPS) activity, which inhibits Streptobacillus moniliformis growth, revealed growth consistent with Streptobacillus moniliformis, (Figure 4). The identification of the organism was confirmed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). A bone scan did not reveal evidence of osteomyelitis. Testing for antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), types 1 and 2, and Bartonella were negative and testing for parvovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus titers were consistent with past infections.
A transesophageal echocardiogram performed at the beginning of the hospitalization and the intraoperative echocardiogram done 2 weeks later revealed an enlarging aortic valve vegetation, as well as severe and increasing aortic regurgitation, moderate to severe mitral regurgitation, and an intraventricular abscess.
Treatment and Followup
Two weeks after admission, aortic root replacement, debridement of an intraventricular abscess that involved the right coronary artery, and repair of the mitral and tricuspid valves were performed. The patient continued to have intermittent fevers post-operatively. Rifampin was added to the treatment regimen, with plans to continue the gentamicin for the first two weeks of therapy, and the other antibiotics for six weeks. The patient improved significantly, but aortic insufficiency persisted and an aneurysmal eruption occurred at the site of his aortic root patch. He continued to be followed closely by cardiology.
Discussion
Streptobacillus moniliformis is a fastidious gram-negative anaerobic bacillus, which is known to cause rat-bite fever and erythema arthriticum epidemicum (also known as Haverhill fever). Its natural habitat is the upper respiratory tract of rodents. Human infection is usually caused by rat bites or rat contact with a break in the skin. Clinical findings occur anywhere from two to twenty-one days after inoculation, with an abrupt onset of fever, headache, vomiting, myalgias and a rash that routinely involves the palms and soles. Reported complications of S. moniliformis infection include endocarditis, meningitis, hepatitis and nephritis. Growth of the bacteria on blood culture media requires media that does not contain sodium polyanethol sulfonate, an anticoagulant known to inhibit S. moniliformis growth. Penicillin is the drug of choice for patients with rat-bite fever.
Final Diagnosis
Aortic valve endocarditis caused by Streptobacillus moniliformis infection.
References
Byington, CL and Basow, RD. Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. Feigin and Cherry. Fifth Edition, 2004, pp. 1687-1689. Elliott, S.P. (2007). Rat bite fever and Streptobacillus moniliformis. Clin Microbiol Rev 20, 13-22.
PMID:17223620(PubMed abstract)
Byington, CL and Basow, RD. Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. Feigin and Cherry. Fifth Edition, 2004, pp. 1687-1689.
Elliott, S.P. (2007). Rat bite fever and Streptobacillus moniliformis. Clin Microbiol Rev 20, 13-22.
PMID:17223620(PubMed abstract)
