History of Present Illness
2007 December Featured Case Summary: A boy with fever, lip lesions, conjunctivitis, pharyngitis, rash and pneumonia.
A 7-year-old boy with a history of glomerulonephritis was well until 4 days before admission when mild upper respiratory tract symptoms, rhinorrhea and cough developed. The next day (in mid-summer), he went to the beach and waded in the ocean water. Two days before admission, the temperature rose to 104.0°F (40.0°C). The next day, pharyngitis, swollen lips associated with mouth sores, swollen eyelids, conjunctivitis and a rash on his back and trunk developed; urine output decreased, and the urine became tea-colored. He had poor oral intake and vomited non-bloody emesis. He was admitted to the hospital.
Past Medical History
Approximately four months before admission, cellulitis behind the left knee occurred. Streptococcus was cultured, and cefoxitin and hydrocortisone administered. Two weeks later, gastroenteritis caused by rotavirus occurred, after which his urine became tea-colored, and hematuria was noted. Fluids and ceftriaxone were administered. The evaluation revealed normal test results for anti-streptolysin O (ASO) titer and immunoglobulin (Ig) A level, but borderline deoxyribonuclease (DNase) 1:170 titer, where the normal reference range is less than 1:170. Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis was presumptively diagnosed. He was followed by a nephrologist and did well, with decreasing microscopic hematuria, until this illness. Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) was positive at 1:40 and 1:160 in a speckled pattern. Growth and development were normal for age.
Medications
He had received routine childhood immunizations, including Varicella vaccination.
Allergies
He was allergic to amoxicillin, which had caused hives, and had tolerated cephalosporins.
Family History
There was a family history of hypertension, stroke and diabetes. One cousin had growth problems. There was no known history of renal disease.
Social History
He lived with his mother and attended school.
Epidemiological History
There was no exposure to standing water (ponds or lakes) and he had swum in a chlorinated pool and waded in the ocean. There was no known exposure to anyone with herpes simplex virus, or to insect bites or wild animals.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared fatigued but not toxic, with moderate lip pain. The temperature was 101.1°F (38.4°C), pulse 131 beats per minute, blood pressure 110/61 mm Hg. Oxygen saturation while breathing ambient air was 95%. There was palpebral conjunctival injection; the bulbar conjunctivae were only minimally injected. The lips were swollen with a hemorrhagic crust. The anterior gingiva was relatively spared. The hard palatal roof had myriad tiny superficial ulcerations and the posterior pharynx was poorly visualized due to a sensitive gag reflex. There was tender cervical lymphadenopathy. The tongue was normal; there was no rhinorrhea or sinus tenderness, and the neck was supple. Decreased basilar breath sounds were heard, with no rhonchi. There were numerous crimson oval-round lesions on the back, with a few more on the anterior chest and abdomen. Several had central punctate ulcers, and a few had larger areas of central superficial sloughs. A pustule occupied most of an erythematous lesion in the right scapular area; there were no lesions on the hands or feet. (See Figures 1 through 4.) The remainder of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Rash on back.
Figure 2. Lip lesions and rash.
Figure 3. Detail of rash on back.
Figure 4. Eye findings.
Studies
The white cell count was 13,500 cells per microliter (66% neutrophils, 10% lymphocytes, 9% monocytes, 1% basophils, and 14% bands), hematocrit 36.7%, platelets 380,000 per microliter, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 78 millimeters per hour. Serum electrolytes and tests of renal function were normal. Analysis of the urine revealed red, cloudy urine with 3+ blood (25-50 red cells per high-powered field) and 3+ protein, with 1+ leukocytes, and 0-2 hyaline casts. A rapid strep test was positive.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A chest radiograph was interpreted as showing a left lower lobe pneumonia. Acyclovir and cefazolin (600 mg intravenously three times daily) were administered for possible herpetic syndrome and pneumonia. On the 2nd hospital day, an episode of diarrhea and emesis occurred. The patient was transferred to a tertiary care hospital.
On examination, there was a low-grade fever, and multiple skin lesions with sharp borders, some of which had a punctate central vesicle. The lesions measured less than 2 centimeters, and were present on the back, chest, abdomen, and extremities. A repeat chest radiograph (Figure 5) revealed a partial obscuration of the left hemidiaphragm, which was thought to represent a left lower lobe pneumonia. The heterophile antibody was negative.
Figure 5. Chest radiograph.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of a specimen from the throat was positive for Mycoplasma pneumoniae nucleic acid. Pathological examination of a skin biopsy of lesion on the chest revealed impetiginized vesicular dermatitis with epidermal necrosis, dyskeratotic cells, ulceration, and mixed inflammatory infiltrate, which were thought to be compatible with Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Cytopathic changes diagnostic of a viral etiology such as herpes or coxsackie virus were not seen and immunohistochemistry stains for varicella zoster virus and herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 were negative.
Indirect immunofluorescence testing for anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies (ANCA) and ELISAs for antibodies to p29 (proteinase 3) and myeloperoxidase were negative. The following were negative: ASO, rheumatoid factor (RF), ANA, anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-Sm, anti-RNP, lupus anticoagulant, and anticardiolipin IgG; anticardiolipin IgM was 29.4 (reference range 0-15 mpl). Total urine protein over 24 hours measured 520 mg (reference range 0-165 mg per 24 hours). Immunoglobulin A was 279 mg/dl (reference range 33-199 mg/dl), and smooth muscle antibody was positive at 1:40 dilution (reference range, negative at 1:20).
Treatment and Followup
On the 2nd hospital day, azithromycin was added. After the results of the PCR test were known, the other antibiotics were stopped and azithromycin alone continued. During the 5 months after discharge, hematuria and proteinuria persisted, and hypertension developed. Pathological examination of a renal biopsy revealed IgA deposition, and IgA nephropathy was diagnosed.
Discussion
A unifying diagnosis of this child’s multiple acute findings is a primary infection of Mycoplasma pneumoniae, with pneumonia, conjunctivitis, and skin lesions, some of which were vesicular and some present at the mucocutaneous junction, consistent with erythema multiforme major or Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Of note, the pneumonia of Mycoplasma pneumoniae is more typically thought of as a non-lobar or interstitial process, however does not always present as such, as seen in this case. Children less than 3 years of age primarily exhibit upper respiratory symptoms, and those 5 and above are more likely to have bronchitis or pneumonia. The association of the skin lesions of erythema multiforme major, or Stevens-Johnson syndrome, described as erythematous vesicles, plaques and bullae, have occurred in up to 7% of patients with Mycoplasma pneumonia, particularly in younger, male patients. The distribution of infection is worldwide, and most studies have shown no seasonal preference. Cases of IgA nephropathy have been associated with Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection, although in this patient, with pre-existing renal disease, a clear association is more difficult to make.
Primary herpetic gingivostomatitis was unlikely, given all the findings including pneumonia. His illness was not suggestive of leptospirosis despite his conjunctival findings. The rash of Kawasaki’s disease is usually acral and the lesions are not typically vesicular; the lips are more likely to appear chapped rather than with a hemorrhagic crust. There were no hand or foot lesions to suggest hand, foot and mouth disease due to Coxsackie virus infection.
Final Diagnosis
Pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae, with skin and mucosal membrane lesions consistent with Stevens-Johnson Syndrome.
References
Baum, SG, Chapter 181, Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Atypical Pneumonia; Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R. Chapter 181" Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Ed., Vol. 2. 2005, 2271-2280. Elsevier Churchill Livingstone. Kanayama Y, Shiota K, Kotumi K, Ikuno Y, Yasumoto R, Ishii M, Inoue T. Mycoplasma pneumoniae pneumonia associated with IgA nephropathy. Scand J Infect Dis. 1982;14(3):231-3
PMID:6755661(PubMed abstract) Levy M, Shear NH. Clin Pediatr (Phila). Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections and Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Report of eight cases and review of the literature. 1991 Jan;30(1):42-9
PMID:1899814(PubMed abstract) Mulvey JM, Padowitz A, Lindley-Jones M, Nickels R. Mycoplasma pneumoniae associated with Stevens Johnson syndrome. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2007 Jun;35(3):414-7
PMID:17591139(PubMed abstract)
Baum, SG, Chapter 181, Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Atypical Pneumonia; Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R. Chapter 181" Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Ed., Vol. 2. 2005, 2271-2280. Elsevier Churchill Livingstone.
Kanayama Y, Shiota K, Kotumi K, Ikuno Y, Yasumoto R, Ishii M, Inoue T. Mycoplasma pneumoniae pneumonia associated with IgA nephropathy. Scand J Infect Dis. 1982;14(3):231-3
PMID:6755661(PubMed abstract)
Levy M, Shear NH. Clin Pediatr (Phila). Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections and Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Report of eight cases and review of the literature. 1991 Jan;30(1):42-9
PMID:1899814(PubMed abstract)
Mulvey JM, Padowitz A, Lindley-Jones M, Nickels R. Mycoplasma pneumoniae associated with Stevens Johnson syndrome. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2007 Jun;35(3):414-7
PMID:17591139(PubMed abstract)
