History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Summary: A man in his thirties with vertigo and nausea.
A man in his thirties began experiencing dizzy “spells” acutely one morning. Over subsequent days, the dizziness increased and he developed an unsteady gait. He went to an emergency room, where benign positional vertigo was diagnosed and meclizine was prescribed. However, his symptoms increased and became persistent. He developed nausea and vomiting and returned to the emergency room. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain showed an area of hypoattenuation in the medial left cerebellum.
He was transferred to another hospital for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). He reported no history of headache, photophobia, fever, chills, stiff neck or change in sensorium.
Past Medical History
None.
Medications
None.
Epidemiological History
He was monogamous with his wife. He reported eating raw oysters and uncooked fish. He had visiting a petting zoo eight months earlier, and had traveled to Kenya five years before. In Africa, he had swum in Lake Victoria and gone on safari. He had had mild diarrhea for two days during his return from Kenya. He had no recollection of subsequent fevers or rashes. He had no pets, drank alcohol rarely and did not smoke.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared uncomfortable. The temperature was 98.0°F (36.7°C), blood pressure 120/80 mm Hg, pulse 80 beats per minute, and respirations 12 breaths per minute. Neurological examination showed bilateral horizontal nystagmus and terminal dysmetria on finger-nose-finger testing, especially on the left. The gait was wide-based and unsteady. There was no meningismus. There was no hepatosplenomegaly or ascites, and his skin had no lesions. The remainder of his examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 8,000/mm³ (70% neutrophils, 21% lymphocytes, monocytes 6.3%, eosinophils 1.4%). The remainder of the complete blood cell count (CBC) and levels of electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose and liver function tests were normal. A test for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative.
Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed normal levels of protein and glucose, 1550 red cells and 110 white cells per cubic millimeter, with 4% neutrophils, 86% lymphocytes, 9% monocytes, and 1% eosinophils, with no other cells noted. Examination of a stool specimen by trichrome stain showed no ova and parasites.
The MRI scan, performed with gadolinium, demonstrated a T-2 abnormality (Figure 1), which included a frond-like enhancement in the inferior cerebellar vermis and nodulus, the left superior cerebellar peduncle, medial cerebellum (the left more than right) and the medial aspect of the right brachium pontis. A T-1 abnormality was also seen (Figure 2).
Figure 1. MRI scan with gadolinium.
Figure 2. Head MRI scan T1.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient’s nausea and dizziness increased. He did not developed a headache, change in sensorium, fevers or systemic signs.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Because the differential diagnosis included malignancy, a brain biopsy via a suboccipital approach was performed. The frozen section was consistent with “parasite”. Approximately 25% of the lesion was resected.
On pathologic examination, sections of the cerebellum reveal scattered large necrotizing granulomas composed of eosinophils, histiocytes, lymphocytes and giant cells (Figure 3). Figure 4 demonstrates Schistosoma mansoni ova within the granulomata, some with prominent lateral spines. The eggs measure approximately 120 by 50 microns. They were widely spaced, with one to three eggs present per granuloma. Figure 5 demonstrates an ovum within a granuloma. Figures 6 (low power) and Figure 7 (high power) demonstrate the Splendore-Hoeppli reaction, composed of antigen-antibody complexes surrounding the ovum. Figure 8 demonstrates an ovum with a prominent lateral spine. Most eggs show maturing miracidium larvae within, although occasional eggs appear as empty shells. None were calcified, and no adult parasites were identified.
Figure 3. Brain biopsy of cerebellum.
Figure 4. Brain biopsy results.
Figure 5. Brain biopsy.
Figure 6. Splendore-Hoeppli reaction on low power.
Figure 7. Splendore-Hoeppli reaction.
Figure 8. An ovum with lateral spine.
Treatment and Followup
After neurosurgery, the patient was placed on high-dose dexamethasone. Nonetheless, he had an acute deterioration of his mental status. By CT scan he was noted to have developed hydrocephalus and cerebellar herniation. He had a ventriculostomy placed. He was treated with 5 days of praziquantel (45 mg/kg/day) and high dose steroids. Post-operatively while on therapy he had severe nausea, vomiting, photophobia and meningismus which began to resolve by post-operative day 6. Ten days post-operatively his ventriculostomy was removed, his mental status had improved and his cerebellar signs and symptoms had begun to resolve. He continued to improve to baseline, with some residual nausea.
Testing for antibodies to Schistosoma was positive at 5.71 (negative=<1.00) using the microsomal fraction of adult S. mansoni worms as antigen (Focus Technologies). No ova were identified in his stool.
Discussion
Schistosomiasis is common worldwide, with an estimated 200 million people infected. The infection is acquired in fresh water when the cercarial form of the fluke penetrates human skin, then changes form into the schistosomulum, which migrates through the pulmonary and then systemic circulation and eventually to the portal veins. In the portal system the organisms mature into adult flukes. The male and female forms pair and then, for S. mansoni, they typically migrate to the mesenteric venules to mate. The female migrates further against venous flow and lays eggs. Some eggs embed into the venule wall and arrive eventually in the intestinal lumen, and then are shed in stool. Other eggs are carried into the hepatic microvasculature, where they lodge and instigate a granulomatous inflammatory response. Eventually, this process can lead to portal tract fibrosis and portal hypertension. Eggs are passed in stool and hatch in freshwater.
The hatched miracidiae penetrate snails (Biomphalaria). Within the snails, sporocysts form and metamorphose into cercariae, which are released into freshwater. There are two potential ways in which Schistosomiasis can involve the central nervous system: aberrant migration of flukes or, more commonly, systemic embolization of eggs (typically in the setting of portal hypertension and collateral circulation). It is thought that S. mansoni is a less common cause of brain disease than S. japonicum because the larger size of S. mansoni eggs and the presence of their lateral spine makes egg migration through the vertebral venous plexus to the brain less likely. However, in this patient, it was likely ectopic migration of the fluke pair to the cerebellar venous system, followed by attachment and subsequent prolific egg deposition that led to the large area of eosinophilic granulomata and mass effect. This area of inflammation with multiple eggs present can be many times larger than single egg granulomas and is a rare manifestation within the brain - the so-called “tumoral” form of neuroschistosomiasis. The presentation reflects the anatomic location of the granulomatous lesion and mass effect. The cerebellum is the most common site reported in the literature. A high stool egg burden need not be evident.
Our patient most likely acquired his disease during his swim in Lake Victoria five years earlier. S. mansoni flukes can survive up to 30 years in a host, though average life span is estimated 5-10 years. His presentation is relatively late in comparison to other reports of tumoral neuroschistosomiasis in the literature. Typical treatment for central nervous system (CNS) schistosomiasis involves praziquantel directed towards the fluke and steroids to lessen the granulomatous inflammatory response provoked by the eggs. Although steroids can significantly decrease CNS levels of praziquantel, generally the venules in which the flukes reside are outside the brain tissue itself. In cases found in the literature, treatment was successful in some after two doses of praziquantel, while others described patients with CNS disease requiring additional doses. Though the literature is divergent, most experts favor 5 days of therapy along with a very slow steroid taper. Reemergence of symptoms can be associated with too rapid a steroid taper.
Final Diagnosis
Neuroschistosomiasis caused by Schistosoma mansoni leading to cerebellar tumoral lesion.
References
