History of Present Illness
2011 September-October Featured Case Summary: An HIV-positive man with a painful rash of three weeks’ duration.
A man with a history of human immunodeficiency virus (In Infectious Diseases, some conditions, such as HIV, have such a profound influence on the differential diagnosis that they are generally included in the Chief Complaint in addition to the Past Medical History.) (HIV) infection developed a painful rash.
The patient had been in his usual state of health until three weeks (The duration of symptoms is often an important clue. For example, although many viral infections can cause rashes, it would be very unusual for them to persist for weeks.) before admission when an erythematous painful (Most rashes are not painful and this information limits the differential. Painful skin lesions are most classically associated with herpes viruses such as herpes simplex virus (HSV) and varicella zoster virus (VZV), but these infections do not persist for weeks unless the patient is deeply immunosuppressed.) lesion developed on his arm. During the following weeks, skin lesions developed on his face, trunk, extremities, back and genitalia. He also developed headache, neck pain and photophobia (This combination of symptoms is descriptive of "meningismus", suggesting central nervous system involvement with inflammation of the meninges.). One week before presentation, lightheadedness and nausea (Nausea and meningismus could be a worrisome sign of increased intracranial pressure.) occurred.
He was brought to the emergency department for evaluation. He reported some joint discomfort, without focal joint swelling or erythema. He reported no diplopia, focal weakness, numbness, dysuria, urethral discharge, chest pain, dyspnea, cough, upper respiratory symptoms, or gastrointestinal symptoms.
Past Medical History
He was diagnosed with HIV several years earlier. Two years before admission, the CD4+ T-lymphocyte count (The CD4+ T-lymphocyte count is the most important variable in framing the differential diagnosis in the HIV-infected patient. Serious opportunistic infections are unusual until CD4+ cell counts drop below 200 per cubic millimeter, but more subtle signs, such as increased herpes lesions can be seen when the CD4+ count is higher.) was approximately 400 cells/mm³. He had never had a history of opportunistic infections or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) defining illnesses, and had never taken antiretroviral medications (For more than twenty years, the administration of antiretroviral drugs was only recommended for when CD4+ counts dropped below a set threshold - initially 200, and more recently 350 per cubic millimeter - in order to balance benefit with toxicity, but in 2012, the US Dept. of Health & Human Services amended its guidelines to suggest offering antiretrovirals to all HIV-infected people ready to commit to take medication regardless of CD4+ count. (http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines) This reflects decreasing toxicity of the drugs, increasing evidence for benefit of early therapy and accumulation of data showing the value of treatment in preventing transmission.).
Medications
Medications included an over-the-counter non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug.
Allergies
He had no allergies.
Epidemiological History
He had not traveled outside of the country. He was sexually active with men and did not always practice safe sex (The details of the sexual history are important in assessing a patient's HIV risks, since there exist several orders of magnitude difference between very low HIV risk acts such as oral sex and very high risk acts like unprotected receptive anal intercourse.). He denied exposure to any animals or tick bites (Animal and insect exposure are essential elements of the history illnesses associated with a rash. The skin lesion depicted in this case would be consistent with an insect-borne rickettsial infection, but this patient has not had the relevant exposure.). He reported that he had not had any sick contacts.
Physical Examination
On examination, the temperature was 99.0°F (37.2°C), blood pressure 140/88 mm Hg, pulse 109 per minute, respirations 18 per minute and oxygen saturation 99% while breathing ambient air. He appeared uncomfortable, lying flat in bed. There was evidence of white plaques on the oral mucosa, suggestive of thrush (Thrush is a candidal infection in the oral cavity that is often seen in people on steroid therapy, but may also be an early sign of immunodeficiency, such as in HIV disease.). There was neck pain with flexion (This is the physical finding to go along with his symptoms of meningismus.). The abdomen was tender in the right upper quadrant (Raising the question of liver or gallbladder inflammation.). Numerous infiltrated papules with variable amounts of scale were scattered over the face, arms, legs, and trunk (Figures 1 and 2). Many of the lesions had a central scale-crust, suggestive of prior pustular or vesicular appearance, or drainage, and several infiltrated papules on the palms (Although a large number of illnesses can cause rashes, only a handful typically involve the palms and soles, and this is a major diagnostic clue. Among bacterial infections, involvement of the palms and soles is classically associated with secondary syphilis, meningococcemia, disseminated gonorrhea, and Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever.) had a central hemorrhagic crust. A few lesions appeared acneiform (The varied character of the lesions is unusual for most rashes associated with infections but is common in secondary syphilis.). The remainder of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Figure 2. Physical finding.
Studies
The hematocrit was 34.2% (reference range 41.0-53.0 for men), white cell count 4500 cells/mm³ (ref 4500-11,000), with a normal differential (The differential provides the percentage and/or absolute cell counts for the components of the total white cell count - that is, the number of neutrophils, lymphocytes, eosinophils, etc. It often provides valuable clues to the diagnosis. Here the normal differential argues against severe acute bacterial infection, in which a higher neutrophil count or a higher percentage of band forms might be seen.), and the level of CD4+ T-lymphocytes was 247 (This is moderate immunosuppression, enough to increase risks of infection overall but not enough to be at high risk for severe opportunistic infection.) /mm³ (ref 348-1456). The serum sodium was 131 mmol/L (ref 135-145), alkaline phosphatase (Elevation of the alkaline phosphatase suggests cholestasis or an infiltrative process of the liver) 1030 U/L (ref 45-115), alanine aminotransferase 76 U/L (ref 10-55) and aspartate aminotransferase 75 U/L (ref 10-40). Levels of other electrolytes and calcium and tests of renal function and coagulation were normal.
A chest radiograph revealed slightly under-inflated lungs, and was otherwise normal, with no evidence of pneumonia. An electrocardiogram was normal.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
During the first day, the temperature rose to 102.2°F (39.0°C). Acyclovir, morphine and intravenous fluids were administered. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head demonstrated mucosal thickening throughout the paranasal sinuses, symmetric prominence of the nasopharyngeal soft tissues and partial opacification of the mastoid air cells bilaterally, with prominent cervical lymph nodes. Ultrasonography of the abdomen showed splenomegaly.
The level of HIV RNA by PCR was 245,000 copies per milliliter (This level of HIV RNA falls within a common range found in HIV-infected individuals not taking antiretrovirals. In acute HIV infection, a newly-infected person will typically have negative antibody tests, and the diagnosis needs to be made by testing directly for viral RNA.), and testing for viral hepatitis (types B and C) was negative.
A biopsy of a lesion was performed. Pathological examination of the tissue with hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) staining, shown in Figures 3 and 4, revealed superficial and deep plasmacytic infiltrate. (Pathology images provided by Devon C. Gimbel, MD.)
Figure 3. Hematoxylin and eosin stain of skin biopsy.
Figure 4. Hematoxylin and eosin stain of skin biopsy.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The serum rapid plasma reagin (The common screening tests for syphilis, the RPR and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test or VDRL, rely on the observation early in the 20th Century that people with syphilis developed antibodies against a component of beef heart extracts, eventually shown to be cardiolipin. The tests are still in wide use today since they are very sensitive, inexpensive, and well-validated.) (RPR) test was positive at a dilution of 1:256, and testing for anti-treponemal antibody (Positive RPR screening tests are usually confirmed by more specific testing for antibodies against the syphilis organism itself.) was also positive. Treponema pallidum immunohistochemical staining of a skin biopsy revealed spirochetes between keratinocytes within the epidermis (Figure 5). (Pathology image provided by Devon C. Gimbel, MD.)
Serum tests for Cryptococcus, Toxoplasma, herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 and -2 were negative. Serologic testing was consistent with past VZV infection. Skin cultures (Superficial cultures of the skin will usually grow normal skin flora, which are often unrelated to the underlying infection.) also grew two types of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, in rare to moderate amounts. Blood cultures were sterile.
Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (This patient's CSF showed a slightly elevated number of lymphocytes: a lymphocytic pleocytosis. Most commonly seen in viral infections, it can also be seen in more subacute to chronic CNS infections such as syphilis and Lyme disease.) (CSF) obtained by lumbar puncture revealed 11 white cells/cubic millimeter (ref 0-5 cells), with 4% neutrophils, 90% lymphocytes and 6% monocytes and 2 red cells per cubic millimeter in the 4th tube, with protein 26 mg/dl (ref 5-55) and glucose 49 mg/dl (ref 50-75). There were no organisms visible on gram stain. The CSF venereal disease research laboratory (A positive CSF VDRL test confirms the diagnosis of neurosyphilis since the test is very specific, but a negative test does not rule it out, since it has more limited sensitivity.) (VDRL) test was negative. Tests of the CSF for VZV, Cryptococcus, Borrelia burgdorferi and enterovirus were negative. Cultures of the CSF were negative, as was DNA amplification tests for HSV. Culture of a skin lesion for HSV and VZV was also negative.
Figure 5. Immunostain of biopsy, showing spirochetes.
Treatment and Followup
Acyclovir (Acyclovir is an antiviral drug with activity against Herpes Simplex Virus and Varicella Zoster Virus. Therapy is often instituted empirically when the question of central nervous system herpesvirus infection is raised, since early therapy can be life-saving.) was stopped after testing for HSV was negative. Intravenous penicillin G was administered for possible neurosyphilis. There was no evidence of retinal involvement by ophthalmological examination. Urine tests for Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae nucleic acids were negative.
Elevation of the level of alkaline phosphatase was thought to be consistent with syphilitic hepatitis. The liver tests improved after treatment for syphilis.
Repeat clinical evaluation and serologic testing by RPR at months 1, 3, 6, and 12 post-treatment were planned, with a goal of a four-fold decrease in titers.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis (Prophylactic antibiotics to prevent Pneumocystis pneumonia, the most common AIDS-associated infection in the U.S., would usually be started when the CD4+ cell count fell below 200. With highly-active antiretroviral therapy, there is usually a sustained increase to normal levels of the CD4+ cell count, after which the trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole can be stopped.) and treatment with fluconazole (An antifungal of the azole class, inhibiting the synthesis of egosterol, an essential component of fungal, but not animal, cell membranes.) for thrush were begun. Follow-up for initiation of anti-retroviral medications was scheduled.
Discussion
This case illustrates distinctive aspects of the presentation of secondary syphilis, including the protean nature of its rash. Though a maculopapular eruption is common in syphilis, macular, papular, psoriasiform, and pustular lesions, as in our case, are also reported [Chapel TA 1980]. The rash can involve any area of the body and most commonly begins with development of discrete macular lesions, evolving into red papules, sometimes progressing to pustules, known as pustular syphilids [Tramont 2010].
The patient also had headache and meningismus. Meningeal signs, including headache and neck stiffness, are seen in 8-40% of patients with secondary syphilis and can signal dissemination of spirochetes into the central nervous system [Merritt 1940]. Alternate manifestations of early neurosyphilis include ocular and auditory abnormalities, dysfunction of other cranial nerves, and stroke [CDC 2007]. Any of these findings in a patient with syphilis warrants a lumbar puncture for evaluation. The diagnosis of neurosyphilis can be challenging, especially in patients with HIV due to baseline CSF abnormalities [Ghanem, Moore et al. 2008], but can be divided into 'definitive' by positive CSF Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL), and 'probable' by elevated white blood cell count (greater or equal to 10 cells/mm³) or protein (greater or equal to 50 mg/dL) in the absence of a positive VDRL and an alternate diagnosis [Marra 2009]. In those with a negative CSF VDRL, a treponemal antibody test can be performed; this test has increased sensitivity (approaching 100%) but less specificity (approximately 40%) [Marra et al. 2004]. In this case, there was not enough CSF available to perform a specific treponemal test. Because of the severity of the patient's meningeal symptoms and signs, a decision was made to treat him with intravenous penicillin for possible neurosyphilis.
Finally, the patient's elevated liver function tests suggested the possibility of syphilitic hepatitis.
As noted above, repeat clinical evaluation and serologic testing by RPR extending through 12 months post-treatment were planned, with a goal of a four-fold decrease in titers to confirm successful treatment [Workowski and Berman 2006]. Failure to achieve a serologic response, which might be more common in HIV-positive patients [Ghanem et al. 2007], warrants repeat evaluation and possible re-treatment.
The presenting triad of fever, headache, and rash as seen in this case warrants rapid evaluation and empiric antibiotics while diagnostic evaluation is performed. The most worrisome causes are meningococcemia, Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, and Toxic Shock Syndrome. In this case, lack of petechiae or diffuse erythematous macules, lack of a neutrophilic pleocytosis in the cerebrospinal fluid, and relatively prolonged duration of symptoms made these diagnoses unlikely. Other infectious etiologies, including disseminated herpesvirus infections (HSV, VZV), Coxsackie virus infection, and disseminated cryptococcal disease were considered, and ruled out. Non-infectious etiologies, including adverse drug reaction and pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta, remained in the differential until the diagnosis of secondary syphilis was confirmed.
Final Diagnosis
Secondary syphilis caused by Treponema pallidum in a patient with HIV infection.
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)(2007). Symptomatic early neurosyphilis among HIV-positive men who have sex with men--four cities, United States, January 2002-June 2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 56, 625-628.
PMID:17597693(PubMed abstract) Chapel, T.A. (1980). The signs and symptoms of secondary syphilis. Sex Transm Dis 7, 161-164.
PMID:7455863(PubMed abstract) Ghanem KG, Moore RD, Rompalo AM, Erbelding EJ, Zenilman JM, Gebo KA. (2008) Neurosyphilis in a clinical cohort of HIV-1-infected patients. AIDS 2008,22:1145-1151.
PMID:18525260(PubMed abstract) Ghanem, K.G., Erbelding, E.J., Wiener, Z.S., and Rompalo, A.M. (2007). Serological response to syphilis treatment in HIV-positive and HIV-negative patients attending sexually transmitted diseases clinics. Sex Transm Infect 83, 97-101.
PMID:16943224(PubMed abstract) Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-1-Infected Adults and Adolescents Downloaded from http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines. Marra, C.M. (2009). Update on neurosyphilis. Curr Infect Dis Rep 11, 127-134.
PMID:19239803(PubMed abstract) Marra, C.M., Tantalo, L.C., Maxwell, C.L., Dougherty, K., and Wood, B. (2004). Alternative cerebrospinal fluid tests to diagnose neurosyphilis in HIV-infected individuals. Neurology 63, 85-88.
PMID:15249615(PubMed abstract) Merritt H. (1940) The Early Clinical and Laboratory Manifestation of Syphilis of the Central Nervous System. The New England Journal of Medicine 1940,223:446-450. Mohr, J.A., Griffiths, W., Jackson, R., Saadah, H., Bird, P., and Riddle, J. (1976). Neurosyphilis and penicillin levels in cerebrospinal fluid. JAMA 236, 2208-2209
PMID:989815(PubMed abstract) Tramont EC, Chapter 238 Treponema pallidum (Syphilis), in Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier; 2010. pp. 3039-3040. 2 v. (cl, 4028, xcvii p.). Workowski, K.A., and Berman, S.M. (2006). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2006. MMWR Recomm Rep 55, 1-94.
PMID:16888612(PubMed abstract)
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)(2007). Symptomatic early neurosyphilis among HIV-positive men who have sex with men--four cities, United States, January 2002-June 2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 56, 625-628.
PMID:17597693(PubMed abstract)
Chapel, T.A. (1980). The signs and symptoms of secondary syphilis. Sex Transm Dis 7, 161-164.
PMID:7455863(PubMed abstract)
Ghanem KG, Moore RD, Rompalo AM, Erbelding EJ, Zenilman JM, Gebo KA. (2008) Neurosyphilis in a clinical cohort of HIV-1-infected patients. AIDS 2008,22:1145-1151.
PMID:18525260(PubMed abstract)
Ghanem, K.G., Erbelding, E.J., Wiener, Z.S., and Rompalo, A.M. (2007). Serological response to syphilis treatment in HIV-positive and HIV-negative patients attending sexually transmitted diseases clinics. Sex Transm Infect 83, 97-101.
PMID:16943224(PubMed abstract)
Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-1-Infected Adults and Adolescents Downloaded from http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines.
Marra, C.M. (2009). Update on neurosyphilis. Curr Infect Dis Rep 11, 127-134.
PMID:19239803(PubMed abstract)
Marra, C.M., Tantalo, L.C., Maxwell, C.L., Dougherty, K., and Wood, B. (2004). Alternative cerebrospinal fluid tests to diagnose neurosyphilis in HIV-infected individuals. Neurology 63, 85-88.
PMID:15249615(PubMed abstract)
Merritt H. (1940) The Early Clinical and Laboratory Manifestation of Syphilis of the Central Nervous System. The New England Journal of Medicine 1940,223:446-450.
Mohr, J.A., Griffiths, W., Jackson, R., Saadah, H., Bird, P., and Riddle, J. (1976). Neurosyphilis and penicillin levels in cerebrospinal fluid. JAMA 236, 2208-2209
PMID:989815(PubMed abstract)
Tramont EC, Chapter 238 Treponema pallidum (Syphilis), in Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier; 2010. pp. 3039-3040. 2 v. (cl, 4028, xcvii p.).
Workowski, K.A., and Berman, S.M. (2006). Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2006. MMWR Recomm Rep 55, 1-94.
PMID:16888612(PubMed abstract)
