History of Present Illness
2012 May-June Featured Case: A man in his forties with a history of stem cell transplantation (The patient is immunocompromised. This is a key aspect of Infectious Diseases diagnosis, since such patients have a different and wider spectrum of possible pathogens and a greater likelihood of having multiple concurrent infections, and localizing inflammatory signs and symptoms may be less apparent.) was admitted with lightheadedness and renal failure, and developed headache after falling.
The patient had a history of constrictive pericarditis with peripheral edema and dyspnea, for which metolazone was recently added to his diuretic medications. Lightheadedness, muscle cramps and acute renal insufficiency developed. He was admitted to the hospital, the diuretics were stopped and fluids administered. His symptoms and renal function improved until the third hospital day, when he fell and hit his head. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the head was normal. He complained of a headache afterwards, which was thought to be related to the fall.
On the fourth hospital day (The tempo of symptom evolution is an important clue. This relatively slow progression would be unusual for most bacterial infections of the central nervous system.), he rated the headache 10 out of 10 in severity (where 10 is the most severe) and reported photophobia (Not truly a phobia in the sense of causing fear but an aversion, since the light is perceived as painful. The combination of headache, photophobia and vomiting is strongly suggestive of increased intracranial pressure.). An episode of vomiting occurred. The following day, confusion developed, with unusual behavior such as urinating on the floor. On the sixth day he was somnolent and unable to follow commands. Repeat CT scan of the head was unchanged.
Past Medical History
Five years before this admission, a diagnosis of anaplastic large T-cell lymphoma was made. He was initially treated with chemotherapy, but relapse occurred later that year, and an autologous stem cell transplant was performed. The following year, the lymphoma recurred and an allogeneic stem cell transplant was performed. The patient’s course was complicated by severe sclerodermatous graft-versus-host disease, for which phototherapy was administered weekly.
He also had constrictive pericarditis, congenital hearing loss, chronic lower extremity ulcers, chronic pulmonary nodules and, beginning approximately ten months prior to this admission, an elevated serum beta-D-glucan ((1->3) beta-D-Glucan is a component of the cell wall of most fungi. The presence of this compound in the blood suggests an invasive fungal infection. It is an important tool, since many of these infections are difficult to detect by conventional culture and because it can help distinguish between true infection and superficial colonization.) level. The patient had received two doses of micafungin intravenously over the two weeks preceding the admission because of the pulmonary nodules and elevated beta-D-glucan. He had also been receiving intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) for hypogammaglobulinemia.
Medications
Medications included prednisone (An anti-inflammatory steroid. This is a very common immunosuppressive agent that increases the risk of many infections.) (20 mg in the morning and 10 mg in the evening), cyclosporine, gabapentin, omeprazole, metoprolol, methadone, oxycodone, acyclovir, penicillin VK, micafungin (An echinocandin antifungal agent that acts by inhibiting the synthesis of beta-D-glucan. In this case, it is being used preemptively, common strategy with immunocompromised patients, since infection can proceed too rapidly to wait for a proven diagnosis.) and monthly inhaled pentamidine (Originally developed as an anti-protozoan drug, inhaled pentamidine has been used since the early days of the AIDS epidemic as a prophylaxis against Pneumocystis pneumonia, even though this organism is now known to be a fungus. The use of prophylactic antimicrobials is an important part of disease prevention in immunocompromised patients.). He had been taking amlodipine, furosemide and metolazone, which had been stopped upon admission.
Allergies
He had had a rash caused by an azole antifungal drug.
Social History
Epidemiological History
He lived in New England with a pet dog. He had worked in construction, but was not working at the time of this illness. He did not smoke, drink alcohol or use illicit drugs.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared uncomfortable, lying in bed with eyes closed. The temperature was 100.8°F (The combination of fever along with the patient's neurological signs is highly concerning for central nervous system infection, although stroke and intracranial bleeding can sometimes cause low-grade fever.) (38.2°C), blood pressure 161/121 mm Hg, pulse 90 beats per minute, respirations 18 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 98% on room air. The head, neck, chest, cardiovascular and abdominal examinations were normal. The patient responded to painful stimuli but was unable to answer questions or follow commands. The cranial nerves were intact. The neck was stiff and extremities were rigid. Attempts to lift the patient by the back of the head led to elevation of the entire body (This patient has meningismus. When the meninges are inflamed as in meningitis, the neck and spine resist flexing, as flexion stretches the meninges. This symptom, along with the fever and mental status changes, indicate that the patient has meningoencephalitis: inflammation of both meninges and brain.), akin to lifting a rigid board. The skin texture was diffusely stiff and fibrotic, with scattered confluent patches of hypopigmentation.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 19,500 per cubic millimeter (reference range 4,500-11,000). Blood levels of electrolytes and tests of hepatic and renal function were normal. The serum level of (1-3)-beta-D-glucan was 37 pg/mL (A normal beta-D-glucan argues against most fungal infections, but a few fungi, notably Xygomycetes and Cryptococcus usually do not cause elevated levels.) (reference range normal less than 60) and galactomannan (A component of the cell of the fungus, Aspergillus. Elevated serum galactomannan levels are used to diagnose invasive infection with this organism.) was less than 0.5 (reference range normal less than 0.5).
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Vancomycin, ampicillin, meropenem, metronidazole, and acyclovir (In meningitis, infection proceeds so rapidly that broad antimicrobial coverage must be started immediately, without waiting for diagnostic culture. In this immunocompromised patient, the differential diagnosis is very broad, necessitating multiple antibiotics and an antiviral medication.) were administered intravenously. Prednisone was changed to hydrocortisone at stress doses.
A lumbar puncture was performed; the opening pressure was not recorded. Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed clear fluid, with 175 red cells per cubic millimeter, 33 white cells per cubic millimeter (This is elevated, but much lower than would be seen in most cases of bacterial meningitis.) (27% polymorphonuclear cells, 49% lymphocytes (The predominance of lymphocytes also argues against bacterial infection.) and 3% eosinophils), protein 94 mg/dL and glucose 61 mg/dL (concurrent serum glucose 119 mg/dL). Gram staining of the CSF is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Gram stain of CSF.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Gram staining (This stain is most often used to detect bacterial infections, but sometimes fungi are seen as deeply Gram-positive, but larger than Gram-positive bacteria. In cryptococcal meningitis, the organisms are usually not seen on Gram stain, but can often be seen with an India Ink stain. In an immunocompromised host with clinical data suggesting a non-bacterial process, it is important to know that cryptococcal infection is a possibility so that tests such as the India Ink stain and cryptococcal antigen measurement can be performed.) of the CSF showed gram-positive budding yeast cells of variable sizes, ranging from spherical to football-shaped, consistent with Cryptococcus (Figure 1). Their thin cell wall differentiates them from Blastomyces, while budding and lack of endospores distinguish them from Coccidioides immitis.
Fungal culture (Culture confirms the diagnosis but, in meningitis, therapy must be started before culture results data are available.) of the CSF grew Cryptococcus, and the CSF cryptococcal antigen (In communities with the necessary resources, this is the most common way this infection is diagnosed. The test is highly sensitive and specific and the data are available much more rapidly than culture.) was positive at a titer of 1:512.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was started on induction therapy (For some serious infections, therapy starts with high-dose intravenous induction to contain the infection, followed by a longer course of usually oral therapy to consolidate the cure of the illness.) with liposomal amphotericin B (Amphotericin is an anti-fungal that acts by binding ergosterol, a components of fungal cell membranes, but not those of animal cells. When formulated in liposomes, much higher doses can be given with less renal toxicity.) (5 mg/kg every 24 hours, intravenously) and flucytosine (25 mg/kg every 6 hours by nasogastric tube). His mental status and meningismus rapidly improved. Two additional lumbar punctures were performed for management of increased intracranial pressure; on the fourth hospital day the opening pressure was 37 cm H2O and on the sixth hospital day the opening pressure was 12 cm H2O. By the sixth day of treatment, the CSF cryptococcal antigen had decreased to 1:8 and fungal stain and culture were negative.
Fluconazole desensitization (Through mechanisms that are not well-understood, many patients with severe allergies to a drug can receive it safely if the drug is given first in extremely low doses, then with escalating doses over several hours until therapeutic levels are reached. Desensitization is maintained as long as the drug is given but allergy returns when the drug is stopped.) was performed because of a history of rash with this class of antifungal medication. After two weeks of induction therapy, he successfully transitioned to oral fluconazole 800 mg daily for consolidation therapy for eight weeks, and then the dose was decreased to 200 mg daily for long-term maintenance therapy.
Discussion
Cryptococcus (which is Latin for “hidden sphere”) is a genus of saprophytic fungus that is found throughout the world and primarily causes disease in immunocompromised hosts. The two species that are associated with human disease are Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus gatii. Although the fungus is classically associated with bird droppings, most patients who develop disease report no history of close bird contact.
In HIV-negative patients, up to 20-60% of cryptococcal disease occurs in organ transplant recipients and consequently, it is important to consider the infection in this population [Vilchez et al. 2002]. In organ transplant recipients, symptoms can be severe and can progress rapidly, as in the case presented, and the mortality rate is high. One review found the overall rate of C. neoformans infection in transplant patients to be 2.8% with a death rate of 42% [Husain et al. 2001]. The immunosuppressive medications, in particular prednisone, are probably the most important risk factor for infection in this group of patients [Vilchez et al. 2002]. Other immunosuppressants, like cyclosporine and the calcineurin inhibitors, may have some antifungal properties, but their immunosuppressant effects are more powerful, and patients taking these drugs are still at high risk for developing cryptococcal infection. However, the type of immunosuppressant medication may influence clinical manifestations; according to one study, tacrolimus use made central nervous system manifestations less likely and skin, soft-tissue or osteoarticular involvement more likely [Husain et al. 2001]. A similar study suggested that an increasing rate of calcineurin inhibitors has led to a higher proportion of isolated pulmonary infection as opposed to disseminated or central nervous system disease [Sun et al. 2009]. Most infections occur more than six months after transplantation and can occur years later, as in the case presented, suggesting that the majority of infections occur by means of primary infection, though earlier infection and reactivation disease can occur.
Most data from this field comes from the solid organ transplant literature. In one series of solid organ transplant recipients, the incidence was higher after heart transplant and lower after kidney transplant [Vilchez et al. 2002]. Studies have also documented a risk of transmitted infection via solid organ transplant and have suggested evaluating donors for evidence of disease [Baddley et al. 2011]. Data from patients receiving stem cell transplants is scarce. In one of the few studies on this topic, it was shown that cryptococcosis is much more rare in hematopoetic stem cell transplant recipients than solid organ transplant recipients (only 9 cases worldwide in HSCT recipients documented) [Sun et al. 2009]. This report also showed that more cases occurred with autologous transplantation than allogeneic transplantation and that cases tend to occur earlier with autologous transplantation compared to allogeneic.
Diagnostic tests for cryptococcal meningitis include detection of the polysaccharide capsular antigen or detection of yeast by the India ink stain or routine fungal stain and culture [Vilchez et al. 2002]. The polysaccharide capsular antigen test can be done on serum, CSF or other samples like bronchoalveolar lavage and pleural fluid, though these are less standardized than the CSF and serum tests. There is a high rate of positivity of both CSF and serum cryptococcal antigen tests in disseminated and meningeal disease in transplant recipients, and a much lower rate in isolated pulmonary disease [Vilchez et al. 2002].
The treatment of cryptococcal meningitis involves decreasing immunosuppressant medication doses if possible, initiation of antifungal therapy, and management of elevated intracranial pressure. Antifungal therapy is divided into three states: induction, consolidation, and chronic maintenance therapy. For organ transplant recipients, the 2010 Infectious Disease Society of America Guidelines recommends liposomal amphotericin B or amphotericin B lipid complex (ABLC) plus flucytosine for 2 weeks of induction therapy (4-6 weeks if flucytosine not included) followed by fluconazole at 400-800 mg daily for 8 weeks of consolidation therapy and then 200-400 mg daily for chronic maintenance therapy for a minimum of 6-12 months [Perfect et al. 2010]. A key feature of this case is that the patient had been receiving micafungin as an outpatient because of an elevated serum beta-glucan test and pulmonary nodules, but micafungin does not treat Cryptococcus and did not protect him from this infection. It is difficult to know whether this patient’s elevated beta-glucan test was the result of cryptococcal infection, which rarely raises the beta-glucan level, or the result of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) administration, which may also elevate the beta-glucan level and cause false-positive results [Ostrosky-Zeichner et al. 2005].
It is important to note that initial worsening of cryptococcal meningitis symptoms may be caused by increased intracranial pressure rather than failure of treatment; elevated pressure should be managed with serial lumbar punctures and, if necessary, lumbar drains or ventriculoperitoneal shunts.
Final Diagnosis
Cryptococcal meningitis in an immunocompromised patient after stem cell transplantation.
References
Baddley, J.W., Schain, D.C., Gupte, A.A., Lodhi, S.A., Kayler, L.K., Frade, J.P., Lockhart, S.R., Chiller, T., Bynon, J.S., Jr., and Bower, W.A. (2011). Transmission of Cryptococcus neoformans by Organ Transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 52, e94-98.
PMID:21220771(PubMed abstract) Davis, J.A., Horn, D.L., Marr, K.A., and Fishman, J.A. (2009). Central nervous system involvement in cryptococcal infection in individuals after solid organ transplantation or with AIDS. Transpl Infect Dis 11, 432-437.
PMID:19638005(PubMed abstract) Husain, S., Wagener, M.M., and Singh, N. (2001). Cryptococcus neoformans infection in organ transplant recipients: variables influencing clinical characteristics and outcome. Emerg Infect Dis 7, 375-381.
PMID:11384512(PubMed abstract) Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Alexander BD, Kett DH, Vazquez J, Pappas PG, Saeki F, Ketchum PA, Wingard J, Schiff R, Tamura H, Finkelman MA, Rex JH.(2005) Multicenter clinical evaluation of the (1-3) beta-D-glucan assay as an aid to diagnosis of fungal infections in humans. Clin Infect Dis. 41(5):654-9.
PMID:16080087(PubMed abstract) Perfect, J.R., Dismukes, W.E., Dromer, F., Goldman, D.L., Graybill, J.R., Hamill, R.J., Harrison, T.S., Larsen, R.A., Lortholary, O., Nguyen, M.H., Pappas, P.G., Powderly, W.G., Singh, N., Sobel, J.D., and Sorrell, T.C. (2010). Clinical practice guidelines for the management of cryptococcal disease: 2010 update by the infectious diseases society of america. Clin Infect Dis 50, 291-322.
PMID:20047480(PubMed abstract) Sun HY, Wagener MM, Singh N. (2009) Cryptococcosis in solid-organ, hematopoietic stem cell, and tissue transplant recipients: evidence-based evolving trends. Clin Infect Dis. 2009:48(11):1566-76.
PMID:19402789(PubMed abstract) Vilchez, R.A., Fung, J., and Kusne, S. (2002). Cryptococcosis in organ transplant recipients: an overview. Am J Transplant 2, 575-580.
PMID:12201357(PubMed abstract)
Baddley, J.W., Schain, D.C., Gupte, A.A., Lodhi, S.A., Kayler, L.K., Frade, J.P., Lockhart, S.R., Chiller, T., Bynon, J.S., Jr., and Bower, W.A. (2011). Transmission of Cryptococcus neoformans by Organ Transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 52, e94-98.
PMID:21220771(PubMed abstract)
Davis, J.A., Horn, D.L., Marr, K.A., and Fishman, J.A. (2009). Central nervous system involvement in cryptococcal infection in individuals after solid organ transplantation or with AIDS. Transpl Infect Dis 11, 432-437.
PMID:19638005(PubMed abstract)
Husain, S., Wagener, M.M., and Singh, N. (2001). Cryptococcus neoformans infection in organ transplant recipients: variables influencing clinical characteristics and outcome. Emerg Infect Dis 7, 375-381.
PMID:11384512(PubMed abstract)
Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Alexander BD, Kett DH, Vazquez J, Pappas PG, Saeki F, Ketchum PA, Wingard J, Schiff R, Tamura H, Finkelman MA, Rex JH.(2005) Multicenter clinical evaluation of the (1-3) beta-D-glucan assay as an aid to diagnosis of fungal infections in humans. Clin Infect Dis. 41(5):654-9.
PMID:16080087(PubMed abstract)
Perfect, J.R., Dismukes, W.E., Dromer, F., Goldman, D.L., Graybill, J.R., Hamill, R.J., Harrison, T.S., Larsen, R.A., Lortholary, O., Nguyen, M.H., Pappas, P.G., Powderly, W.G., Singh, N., Sobel, J.D., and Sorrell, T.C. (2010). Clinical practice guidelines for the management of cryptococcal disease: 2010 update by the infectious diseases society of america. Clin Infect Dis 50, 291-322.
PMID:20047480(PubMed abstract)
Sun HY, Wagener MM, Singh N. (2009) Cryptococcosis in solid-organ, hematopoietic stem cell, and tissue transplant recipients: evidence-based evolving trends. Clin Infect Dis. 2009:48(11):1566-76.
PMID:19402789(PubMed abstract)
Vilchez, R.A., Fung, J., and Kusne, S. (2002). Cryptococcosis in organ transplant recipients: an overview. Am J Transplant 2, 575-580.
PMID:12201357(PubMed abstract)
