History of Present Illness
Summary: A woman with rectal bleeding.
A young adult woman presented with bright red blood per rectum.
She had a history of a congenital clotting factor deficiency that had been discovered in her teenaged years when she had symptoms of menorrhagia, bleeding gums and episodic hematochezia. Several hospitalizations for gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding had occurred, including an admission one month earlier that was treated conservatively with packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, and epsilon aminocaproic acid. Between bleeding episodes, bowel movements were normal.
She was admitted to the intensive care unit after 4-5 episodes of hematochezia. There were no systemic symptoms such as weight loss, fevers, chills, night sweats, cough, or abdominal pain.
Past Medical History
There was a history of a congenital clotting factor deficiency.
Epidemiological History
Three months before admission, she had emigrated from an urban community on the Indian sub-continent. She reported no exposures to animals or sick contacts.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared well-developed and in mild distress. The temperature was 99.4°F (37.4°C), pulse 110 beats per minute, blood pressure 103/57 mm Hg and 100% oxygen saturation on 2-liters oxygen by nasal cannula. There was no scleral icterus, oral lesion, or lymphadenopathy. The lungs were rhonchorous bilaterally, and no cardiac murmurs were present. The abdomen was soft and there was no organomegaly. Skin and joint examinations were normal.
Studies
The hematocrit was 17% and the remainder of the laboratory tests was normal. Testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative. Chest radiography showed patchy airspace disease in the perihilar region. An upper endoscopic examination was negative. Colonoscopy revealed ileal ulcers and pseudopolyps (Figures 1 through 4).
Figure 1. Findings on colonoscopy.
Figure 2. Findings on colonoscopy.
Figure 3. Findings on colonoscopy.
Figure 4. Findings on colonoscopy.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A biopsy of the terminal ileum was performed. Hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stains of the biopsy are shown in Figures 5 and 6.
Figure 5. H and E stain of biopsy.
Figure 6. H and E stain of biopsy (detail).
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The biopsy of the terminal ileum showed ulcerative granulomatous colitis (Figures 5 and 6). Warthin starry and Brown Hopps stains were negative. Ziehl Neelsen staining for acid-fast bacilli was positive (Figures 7 and 8).
Purified protein derivative (PPD) skin testing was positive at 14 millimeters induration. Sputum was induced three times and the results were negative. Stool ova and parasites and cultures were negative. Culture of the ileal biopsy was negative.
Chest radiography cleared rapidly; the abnormal chest radiography at admission was thought to be the result of pulmonary hemorrhage due to her underlying coagulopathy.
Figure 7. Ziehl Neelsen stain of biopsy.
Figure 8. Detail of Figure 7.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was started on antituberculous therapy with rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, as well as Vitamin B6 supplementation. She had no further bleeding and did well.
Discussion
Extrapulmonary tuberculosis constitutes an increasing proportion of tuberculosis (TB) cases reported in the United States (16% in 1991 vs. 20% in 2001). Risk factors for extrapulmonary TB include younger age, HIV infection and female gender.
The most frequently reported extrapulmonary sites of the disease are the lymph nodes, pleura, and bones or joints. However, central nervous system (CNS) disease, genitourinary disease, and abdominal/intestinal disease (as in this case) have been described. The negative stool cultures and ova and parasites ruled out entamoeba and Yersinia in this case. The biopsy of this patient was not consistent with lymphoma or adenocarcinoma.
Granulomatous disease in a young woman with episodic hematochezia placed inflammatory bowel disease quite high on the differential. Gastrointestinal tuberculosis, however, has the characteristic colonoscopic features noted in this case: ileal ulceration and pseudopolyp formation. The diagnosis of gastrointestinal tuberculosis is supported by the patient's exposure to an area endemic for tuberculosis, the positive mantoux (PPD) skin test, and the acid-fast bacilli visible on colonic biopsy.
Final Diagnosis
Gastrointestinal tuberculosis (clinical diagnosis).
References
Kim, K.M., Lee, A., Choi, K.Y., Lee, K.Y., and Kwak, J.J. (1998). Intestinal tuberculosis: clinicopathologic analysis and diagnosis by endoscopic biopsy. Am J Gastroenterol 93, 606-609.
PMID:9576456(PubMed abstract)
