History of Present Illness
Summary: An elderly man with aspiration pneumonia and epistaxis.
An elderly man with a history of ventriculoperitoneal shunt placement and multiple admissions for aspiration pneumonia presented to an outside hospital with recurrent aspiration pneumonia. The pneumonia was found to be due to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), and vancomycin was administered.
After treatment, he required readmission for epistaxis and aspiration, and was intubated. Broad spectrum antibiotics were administered, but the patient became increasingly obtunded. Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed increased ventricular size, and the patient was transferred for additional care.
Past Medical History
There was a history of hypertension, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, congestive heart failure, deep venous thrombosis with implantation of an inferior vena cava (IVC) filter and an open reduction internal fixation procedure of the right hip. He had had an anterior communicating artery aneurysm rupture four years before admission and required placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt at that time.
The patient was a chronic carrier of Hepatitis B virus (Hepatitis B surface antigen positive and surface antibody negative); testing for hepatitis C virus and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was known to be negative the year before.
Epidemiological History
The patient had been monogamous for ten years and had traveled to Europe in the past. There was modest alcohol use and no exposure to pets, tobacco, or intravenous drug use. The tuberculosis skin test (PPD) status was unknown.
Physical Examination
The patient was intubated and sedated. The temperature was 99.0°F (37.2°C), blood pressure 120/68 mm Hg, and pulse 88 beats per minute. The chest examination revealed coarse breath sounds bilaterally. The head, heart, abdomen and extremity examinations were normal. The site of the ventriculoperitoneal shunt was clean, dry and intact. Plantar reflexes were down-going.
Studies
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed large ventricles and periventricular low absorption consistent with ventriculitis.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A lumbar puncture revealed 113 white blood cells per cubic millimeter in the first tube, of which 93% were leukocytes, 3% lymphocytes and 3% monocytes. There were 82 cells per cubic millimeter (95% leukocytes) in the fourth tube. The level of glucose in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was 27 mg/dL and that of total protein was 158 g/dL. A gram stain of the CSF is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Gram stain of CSF.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) gram stain (Figure 1) showed multiple budding yeast. The culture grew Candida dubliniensis (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Culture plate of CSF.
Treatment and Followup
The ventriculoperitoneal shunt (VPS) was removed. The patient was treated with intravenous liposomal amphotericin B (at 7 milligrams per kilogram) and 5-flucytosine.
Fungal staining of the CSF showed successful clearance of yeast within two days. Unfortunately, progressive respiratory failure developed and the patient expired.
Discussion
This is a case of fungal ventriculitis with an unusual Candida species, Candida dubliniensis, in a patient with a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. In a patient with an external ventricular drain in place, the risk of ventriculitis is high and correlated with the length of time the device is in place. Bacteria, usually skin flora such as Staphylococcus species are the most common causes of ventriculitis in the setting of an in-dwelling device. In this case, the individual had also received a long course of broad-spectrum antibiotics during prolonged hospitalization. Both circumstances would be expected to increase his risk of fungal disease.
Candidal species such as Candida albicans, C. glabrata, and C. parapsilosis are the most common fungal causes of ventriculitis. To our knowledge, this is the first published report of C. dubliensis causing ventriculitis. It is possible that the infection may have been acquired nosocomially. Candida dubliniensis has most frequently been described in HIV-infected individuals on fungal prophylaxis with fluconazole, which reduces the presence of other Candidal species. This patient’s last known HIV test was negative one year before admission.
Other non- Candida fungi such as Aspergillus species, have also been reported as causes of ventriculitis, but usually occur after a longer period following placement of a drain, and more often in the setting of steroid use or other immunosuppression. Tuberculous ventriculitis is a less common diagnosis and would be less likely to be associated with a drain.
Final Diagnosis
Ventriculitis caused by Candida dubliniensis infection.
References
Beer, R., Lackner, P., Pfausler, B., and Schmutzhard, E. (2008). Nosocomial ventriculitis and meningitis in neurocritical care patients. J Neurol 255, 1617-1624.
PMID:19156484(PubMed abstract)
