History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Summary: A young man with a neck mass.
A young adult male presented with a mildly tender swelling over the left side of the neck, associated with ten-pound weight loss over three months. He denied fever, chills, loss of appetite, shortness of breath or cough.
Past Medical History
None.
Epidemiological History
The patient had immigrated to the United States from Vietnam four years before.
Physical Examination
He was a slender and had normal vital signs. There were multiple, mildly tender, fluctuant lymph nodes in the anterior and posterior cervical chains and in the supra-clavicular area on the left side. Most nodes measured 1-2 centimeters; the largest was 4 centimeters in diameter. The remainder of examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) count and differential were normal. Other hematological and chemical parameters in the blood were normal. Computed tomography (CT) of the neck and chest are shown in Figures 1 and 2 respectively.
Figure 1. Neck CT scan.
Figure 2. Chest CT scan.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
An excisional biopsy of an enlarged lymph node was performed. Following appropriate treatment, the lesions recurred six months later as shown in Figures 3 and 4.
Figure 3. Physical findings.
Figure 4. Physical finding.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Excisional biopsy showed necrotizing granulomatous lymphadenitis. Acid-fast bacillus (AFB) stain of the biopsy was positive. Culture of biopsy was positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Treatment and Followup
He was treated with rifampin, pyrazinamide, ethambutol and isoniazid (INH) for 6 months, with recurrence 12 months later. He was re-treated with the same four drugs for an additional 6 months.
Discussion
Scrofuloderma results from contiguous extension from an underlying tuberculous focus due to infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Mycobacterium bovis. The overlying tissue starts as a red-brown nodule and then becomes indurated and breaks down. The resulting ulcers and sinuses may drain watery, purulent or caseous material. It is often associated with pulmonary tuberculosis.
Mycobacterium bovis from unpasteurized milk may cause scrofuloderma involving the cervical lymph nodes in developing nations. Biopsy of the lesions shows necrosis with abscess formation with numerous acid-fast bacilli. The patient is often PPD positive. The lesions may heal spontaneously over the course of years.
Final Diagnosis
Scrofuloderma with underlying pulmonary tuberculosis caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
References
