History of Present Illness
IDSA 2001 Case Summary: A man in his seventies with a leg ulcer.
A man in his seventies presented with a history of an enlarging leg ulcer of one year's duration.
The ulcer was at the site of a previous saphenous vein graft harvest and failed skin graft. He also noted skin nodules on both arms. Steroids were administered for a presumptive diagnosis of polyarteritis nodosa, but the nodules persisted. He reported no fevers or other systemic symptoms.
Past Medical History
There was a history of atherosclerosis and diabetes mellitus.
Epidemiological History
He had been born in Ecuador and lived in Texas.
Physical Examination
He was afebrile. The skin findings are shown in Figures 1and 2.
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Figure 2. Physical findings.
Studies
The chest radiograph showed clear lungs. Radiographs of the foot and leg (from the side of the ulcer) are shown in Figures 3 and 4.
Figure 3. Foot radiograph.
Figure 4. Lower leg radiograph.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Pathological examination of a biopsy of the distal left tibia showed suppurative granuloma with central necrosis, but no acid fast bacilli (AFB) were seen. Skin biopsy from the right forearm showed suppurative granulomatous dermatitis with caseating necrosis; again no AFB were seen. Biopsy of a lesion from the left thigh showed similar suppuration and revealed abundant AFB. This specimen later grew Mycobacterium chelonae.
Treatment and Followup
Discussion
Final Diagnosis
Mycobacterium chelonae soft tissue infection and osteomyelitis in a patient with diabetes mellitus and a history of surgical procedures.
References
Lee, W.J., Kang, S.M., Sung, H., Won, C.H., Chang, S.E., Lee, M.W., Kim, M.N., Choi, J.H., and Moon, K.C. (2010). Non-tuberculous mycobacterial infections of the skin: a retrospective study of 29 cases. J Dermatol 37, 965-972.
PMID:21039785(PubMed abstract) Wallace, R.J., Jr., Brown, B.A., and Onyi, G.O. (1992). Skin, soft tissue, and bone infections due to Mycobacterium chelonae chelonae: importance of prior corticosteroid therapy, frequency of disseminated infections, and resistance to oral antimicrobials other than clarithromycin. J Infect Dis 166, 405-412.
PMID:1386098(PubMed abstract)
Lee, W.J., Kang, S.M., Sung, H., Won, C.H., Chang, S.E., Lee, M.W., Kim, M.N., Choi, J.H., and Moon, K.C. (2010). Non-tuberculous mycobacterial infections of the skin: a retrospective study of 29 cases. J Dermatol 37, 965-972.
PMID:21039785(PubMed abstract)
Wallace, R.J., Jr., Brown, B.A., and Onyi, G.O. (1992). Skin, soft tissue, and bone infections due to Mycobacterium chelonae chelonae: importance of prior corticosteroid therapy, frequency of disseminated infections, and resistance to oral antimicrobials other than clarithromycin. J Infect Dis 166, 405-412.
PMID:1386098(PubMed abstract)
