History of Present Illness
IDSA 2005 Case Summary: A woman from Alaska with lower extremity weakness and unsteady gait.
A woman in her sixties presented with weakness of lower extremities and unsteady gait. The symptoms had begun two years earlier and progressed to a total inability to ambulate for several weeks before her presentation. Weight loss had occurred. There was no history of back pain, bowel or bladder incontinence, fever, headache, and no sensory deficits or complaints. She was admitted to the hospital, where magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine had revealed a mass at the T9 vertebra, associated with cord compression. Fine needle aspiration (FNA) showed no malignant cells. An open biopsy and decompression procedure was performed; pathological examinations of the specimens revealed necrosis and inflammation. A wide excision of the mass was performed and symptomatic pain relief was achieved. The patient slowly recovered and eventually was able to ambulate with a cane. She was discharged to home.
Three months before this presentation, the weakness increased and she noted sensory loss with bowel and bladder incontinence. She began to fall frequently while ambulating with a cane and was re-admitted for further evaluation. There was no history of night sweats or fevers. She reported decreased appetite and her family thought that weight loss had occurred.
Past Medical History
Medical problems included hypertension, glaucoma, degenerative joint disease, chronic Hepatitis B virus carrier state, and recurrent urinary tract infections. There was no known exposure to tuberculosis.
Medications
Medications included ibuprofen, atenolol and aspirin.
Epidemiological History
The patient was a married homemaker in Alaska. There was a history of dog sledding when she was younger; she did not drink alcohol, smoke tobacco or travel.
Physical Examination
The blood pressure was 132/55 mm Hg, pulse 65 beats per minute and the temperature was normal. The fundoscopic examination was normal, motor strength was diminished 4/5 in both legs, and sensation was diminished to pain, temperature and light touch. The plantar response was extensor bilaterally; there was no clonus. The gait was very unsteady.
Studies
Laboratory testing was normal. A chest radiograph showed no pulmonary infiltrates and tuberculosis skin testing was negative. Testing for antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was also negative. Repeat MRI scanning of the spine revealed a compressive lesion at the 7th and 8th thoracic vertebrae (T7-T8), which was destructive to bone and extrinsic to the cord (Figures 1, 2 and 3).
Figure 1. MRI scan of the spine.
Figure 2. MRI scan of the spine.
Figure 3. MRI scan of the spine.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed a new ring-enhancing lesion of temporal lobe (Figure 4).
Figure 4. MRI scan of the brain.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A second surgical procedure included extensive removal of the recurrent spinal mass. Pathological and microbiology studies were sent for analysis and culture. The vertebral bodies at T7-8 revealed chronic osteomyelitis, with cystic necrotic structures and adjacent foreign body granulomatous inflammation including lymphocytes and plasma cells. The cysts had a complex layered structure with distinct membranes, consistent with echinococcal cyst (Figures 5 and 6).
Figure 5. Biopsy of the 7th thoracic vertebra (T7).
Figure 6. Biopsy of the 7th thoracic vertebra (T7).
Treatment and Followup
The patient received albendazole and was doing well, ambulating with a walker, at follow-up three months later. The central nervous system lesion had essentially resolved. No other organs were involved.
Discussion
Final Diagnosis
Echinococcal disease, with osteomyelitis of the thoracic spine and involving the brain, most likely caused by Echinococcus granulosus.
References
