History of Present Illness
IDSA 2005 Case Summary: A man with a lung nodule after treatment for a germ cell tumor.
A man in his thirties presented with a lung nodule two years after receiving treatment for an extragonadal germ cell tumor. Two years earlier, he had presented with a retroperitoneal mass, and the germ cell tumor was diagnosed. A retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy had also been performed at the time for hydronephrosis, and four cycles of chemotherapy were administered. Two years after his treatment, surveillance chest radiography revealed a new lung nodule. Two months later, computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed the nodule was increasing in size.
There was no history of night sweats, loss of weight, chest pain, shortness of breath, cough or hemoptysis.
Past Medical History
He also had chronic arthritis of the back, ankles, and hips.
Epidemiological History
The patient was single and lived in Alaska. He smoked tobacco and drank alcohol on weekends.
Physical Examination
The patient was well appearing, with a blood pressure was 117/28 mm Hg, pulse 84 beats per minute, temperature 98.7°F (37.1°C). The physical examination was normal with a well healed midline surgical scar. There were no oral lesions, no lymphadenopathy or testicular masses; the lungs were clear and the abdomen had no organomegaly or masses.
Studies
Laboratory test results were normal, including levels of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 16 U/liter, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 13 U/liter, lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) 200 U/liter, human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) < 2.0 and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) 1.2 ng/ml. Testing for tuberculosis (PPD skin testing) and antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative.
Chest radiograph and computed tomography of the chest are shown (Figures 1 and 2).
Figure 1. Chest radiograph.
Figure 2. Chest CT scan.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Bronchoscopic examination revealed normal airways and bronchial washings showed no acid fast bacilli (AFB).
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A wedge resection of the lung nodule was performed without complications and revealed caseating granulomatous disease (see Figure 3.) Pathological staining was negative for malignancy. Initial sputum and bronchial washings were negative for acid fast bacilli, but a single bacillus was found on AFB staining of the biopsy (Figures 4 and 5). After 6 weeks, cultures grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Figure 3. Biopsy of lung nodule.
Figure 4. AFB staining of lung nodule.
Figure 5. Detail of Figure 4.
Treatment and Followup
A four-drug regimen was administered for eight weeks, followed by isoniazid (INH) and rifampin for an additional sixteen weeks, for a total of six months of therapy.
Discussion
Final Diagnosis
Tuberculoma of the left upper lung due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
References
