History of Present Illness
IDSA 2002 Case Summary: A man with abdominal pain and distension for two days.
A man in his forties living in the Middle East presented with a two-day history of moderate abdominal pain and distention. These symptoms were preceded by anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and low-grade fever. He denied any change in bowel habits. His wife had presented three days earlier with a skin lesion over the upper lip. (See Figure 1, which shows a skin lesion over the upper lip of the patient's wife.)
Figure 1. Physical finding for spouse.
Past Medical History
Non-contributory.
Medications
None.
Social History
He did not smoke, or have a history of drug or heavy alcohol use. He worked as a shepherd and was in close contact with animals. Goats were the principal source of meat for his family, and the meat was sometimes consumed raw. The patient did not report any history of travel outside of Lebanon.
Physical Examination
The patient was in shock, with a faint pulse and undetectable blood pressure. The temperature was 38.3°C (100.9°F) and respirations 30 breaths per minute. Abdominal distention was prominent with evidence of ascites. A doughy mass could be felt in the peri-umbilical area.
Studies
Laboratory studies, including white blood cell count (WBC) and differential, were normal.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient underwent a laparotomy, which revealed massive ascites, enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes and edema in the cecum and the adjacent loop of small bowel (Figure 2). The laparotomy showed extensive edema involving the cecum.
Figure 2. Findings on laparotomy.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Gram stain of ascitic fluid revealed gram-positive bacilli with central spores (Figure 3). Pathological examination of an excised mesenteric lymph node revealed gram-positive bacilli (Figure 4).
Ascitic fluid as well as cultures of lymph node tissue yielded large, non-motile, non-hemolytic colonies that stained as gram-positive bacilli and were catalase positive. The organism was susceptible to penicillin, and was identified as Bacillus anthracis. This was confirmed at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention by Dr. Philip S. Brachman.
Figure 3. Gram stain of ascitic fluid.
Figure 4. Mesenteric lymph node.
Treatment and Followup
The patient received intravenous penicillin but despite aggressive resuscitative measures and antibiotic therapy, he expired 24 hours after presentation. His wife was diagnosed with cutaneous anthrax. She received penicillin and had an uneventful recovery.
Discussion
Intestinal anthrax follows the ingestion of contaminated meat. There are three phases that progress over 2-5 days. The first phase includes non-specific symptoms of anorexia, nausea, and vomiting. This is followed by abdominal pain, hematemesis and bloody diarrhea. Lastly, toxemia, shock, cyanosis, and even death may occur. Lesions are frequently seen in the cecum and large intestine. At laparotomy, massive ascites, bowel edema and mesenteric lymphadenopathy may be seen.
Final Diagnosis
Intestinal anthrax caused by Bacillus anthracis.
References
Swartz, M.N. (2001). Recognition and management of anthrax--an update. N Engl J Med 345, 1621-1626.
PMID:11704686(PubMed abstract)
