History of Present Illness
IDSA 2002 Case Summary: A man with vomiting, diarrhea, fever, and headaches.
A man in his twenties was transferred from another hospital in spring with a nine-day history of vomiting, diarrhea, fever and headaches. At the first hospital, results of computed tomography (CT) of the head and abdomen, analysis of cerebrospinal fluid from a lumbar puncture, trans-esophageal echocardiogram and three blood cultures had been negative.
Past Medical History
Negative.
Medications
None.
Epidemiological History
He had a seven pack-year smoking history, and did not drink alcohol or use drugs. There was no recent travel history or tick bites. He worked in a correctional institution, and lived on a farm with goats, chickens, guinea pigs, turkeys, cats and dogs.
Physical Examination
He was obese and appeared acutely ill. The temperature was 104.4°F (40.2°C), pulse 98 beats/minute, respirations 20 breaths/minute, and blood pressure 120/60 mm Hg. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The level of hemoglobin was 11.6 grams/dL and the white blood cell count (WBC) was normal. The level of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 111 U/L (normal 20-60), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 79 U/L (normal 20-60), and alkaline phosphatase 146 U/L (normal 40-125); the bilirubin level was normal. Serological tests for anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), syphilis (RPR), and exposure to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis viruses A, B, and C, Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) were negative.
A chest radiograph was normal. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed hepatosplenomegaly and mild fatty infiltration of the liver. Examination of tissue from a bone marrow biopsy was unremarkable.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A liver biopsy was performed. Pathological examination of the tissue from the liver biopsy is shown in Figures 1 and 2.
Figure 1. Liver biopsy.
Figure 2. Liver biopsy.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The pathological examination of the liver biopsy revealed “doughnut” granulomas (Figures 1 and 2). Q fever serology was negative at week 2 and week 4 after the onset of illness, but at week 8, serological testing showed an immunoglobulin (Ig) M titer greater or equal to 1:10 and IgG greater or equal to 1:1280.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was treated with doxycycline and rifampin for a total course of 6 weeks' duration. His fever resolved and the liver enzymes returned to normal levels one month after the onset of the illness. By the second month, he was completely well.
Discussion
Coxiella burnetii, the agent of Q fever, is contracted through exposure to infected ruminants (parturient goats, cattle, sheep). Transmission mainly occurs by inhalation. Q fever is highly infectious, and may be a possible bioterrorism agent. Acute disease usually presents with high fever, pneumonia or hepatitis. The pathologic finding of "doughnut" granuloma is characteristic of Q fever, but may be seen in Hodgkin's disease, allopurinol hypersensitivity, Epstein-Barr virus infection, cytomegalovirus infection, and Salmonella typhi and Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections.
Final Diagnosis
Q fever caused by Coxiella burnetii.
References
Raoult, D. (2009). Reemergence of Q fever after 11 September 2001. Clin Infect Dis 48, 558-559.
PMID:19191639(PubMed abstract)
