History of Present Illness
2010 June Featured Case Summary: A man with vomiting and mid-epigastric pain.
A man in his thirties was in his usual health until 6 days before when, in late summer, vomiting with non-bloody, non-bilious emesis and mid epigastric pain developed after eating. Three days later, he saw his physician. On examination, the blood pressure was 115/72 mm Hg, pulse 139 beats per minute and temperature 99°F (37.2°C), with mild epigastric tenderness. Gastroesophageal reflux disease was diagnosed and ranitidine with esomeprazole was administered. During the next 2 days, fevers and fatigue occurred. One day before admission, he returned to the out-patient clinic because of persistent nausea and abdominal discomfort. He reported no chest pain, dyspnea, cough, headache, lightheadedness, diarrhea, constipation or night sweats, and no exposures to sick contacts. The blood pressure was 98/65 mm Hg, pulse was 135 beats per minute and the temperature 100.5°F (38.1°C). Urinalysis showed 2+ bilirubin and urobilinogen. An abdominal ultrasound was scheduled. The next day, he went to an emergency department for further evaluation.
He reported no weight loss, anorexia, or cardiac or gastrointestinal symptoms.
Past Medical History
Eighteen months earlier, he had been admitted to the hospital because of cough, with occasional blood-streaked sputum and calcifications on chest radiograph. On computed tomography (CT), there were calcified nodules in the right middle lobe and lymphadenopathy in the right hilum and subcarinal space. Three sputum specimens had been stained and cultured, and were negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. After discharge, and while he was asymptomatic, a tuberculosis skin test was positive at greater than 10 cm diameter induration. Isoniazid was administered for 9 months. A screening test for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was reportedly negative 5-7 years before; the patient declined repeat testing. He had had abdominal pain in the past with Helicobacter pylori infection, which had been treated.
Medications
He was taking esomeprazole.
Social History
He was employed and lived with his girlfriend. He had one child who lived with the child's mother in Africa.
Epidemiological History
He had emigrated from East Africa to the United States more than 5 years before. He had been homeless for several months in the past, drank alcohol and did not use illicit drugs or smoke. He was currently monogamous with his girlfriend.
Physical Examination
The temperature was 98.0°F (36.7°C), blood pressure 106/76 mm Hg and pulse 119 beats per minute; respirations and oxygen saturation were normal. Neck veins were distended and heart sounds were distant. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The hematocrit was 31.1% (reference range 41.0-53.0), white blood cells 6500/mm³ (ref 4500-11,000) with neutrophils 84%, lymphocytes 12% and monocytes 4%. The sodium was 125 mmol/L (ref 135-145), chloride 94 mmol/L (ref 100-108), albumin 2.6 gm/dl (ref 3.3-5.0), globulin 5.1 gm/dl (ref 2.6-4.1), aspartate aminotransferase 121 U/L (ref 10-40), alanine aminotransferase 119 U/L (ref 10-55) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 275 U/L (ref 110-210); other tests, including alkaline phosphatase, amylase, lipase and cardiac enzymes, were normal.
A chest radiograph, shown in Figure 1, demonstrated an enlarged cardiac silhouette and an electrocardiogram (Figure 2) revealed tachycardia and diffuse ST-segment elevations and P-R depressions. A transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated a large circumferential pericardial effusion, with evidence of tamponade physiology and fibrin stranding.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph, on admission.
Figure 2. EKG on admission.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was taken emergently to the cardiac catheterization lab for pericardiocentesis, and 1300 cc of fluorescent green-yellow, clear, free-flowing fluid was aspirated. The pericardial fluid revealed 130 white cells/mm³ (ref 0-1000), with neutrophils 84%, lymphocytes 6%, and monocytes 10%, glucose 27 mg/dl, total protein 9.3 gm/dl, and LDH 1216 U/L. There were no organisms seen on staining of the fluid and cytological examination showed no malignant cells.
During the next 6 days, the pericardial fluid re-accumulated, requiring additional aspirations approximately every 6 hours. On the 3rd day, the chest radiograph revealed a persistently enlarged cardiac silhouette and computed tomography (CT) of the chest (Figure 3 and 4, lung and mediastinal views, respectively) showed a large pericardial effusion.
On the 7th day, a left anterior lateral thoracotomy was performed with pericardial stripping of the anterior and left pericardium, drainage of a large loculated pericardial effusion and placement of pericardial and left pleural drains.
Pathological examination of the pericardial tissue with hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) staining is shown in Figures 5 and 6. (Pathology images courtesy of Richard Kradin, M.D.)
Figure 3. CT scan of the chest, lung view.
Figure 4. CT scan of the chest, mediastinal view.
Figure 5. Pericardial tissue, H and E stain.
Figure 6. Pericardial tissue, H and E stain.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Pathological examination of the pericardial tissue revealed granulomas (Figures 5 and 6, above). A pericardial biopsy specimen demonstrated acid-fast organisms (Figure 7). Cultures of the pericardial fluid obtained by pericardiocentesis during the first 3 days of admission and the pericardial biopsy tissue grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which was resistant to isoniazid, ethambutol, streptomycin and pyrazinamide. A sputum specimen grew Staphylococcus aureus. Testing for HIV was positive, the level of CD4 T-lymphocytes was 9 cells per cubic millimeter and the level of HIV RNA was 25,900 copies per milliliter.
Figure 7. Pericardial tissue, acid-fast stain.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was placed in respiratory isolation and, after surgery, antituberculous therapy was begun with 5 drugs: rifabutin, ethambutol, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and levofloxacin, with pyridoxine and sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, and a tapering course of prednisone. After 10 days, tests of liver function had increased 5 times admission levels, and the 5-drug therapy was stopped. The liver function tests improved. During the next month, additional drug sensitivity testing was performed, which revealed the isolate was susceptible to moxifloxacin (MIC <= 0.5), cycloserine (60 mcg/ml), PAS (8 mcg/ml), and amikacin (<= 2.0 mcg/ml). A new regimen with rifabutin, amikacin, moxifloxacin, cycloserine and PAS was introduced in a step-wise manner.
Between 6 to 8 weeks after admission, signs of constrictive pericarditis developed including anasarca, ascites, tachycardia and restrictive physiology by echocardiography. A total pericardectomy was performed. Histopathological examination of the tissue showed 3+ to 4+ acid fast bacilli.
After 6 months, amikacin was stopped, and the other medications were continued for a total course of 24-months. One month after initiation of antituberculus treatment, antiretroviral medications were begun.
The patient's initial hospital course was complicated by a deep venous thrombosis with decreased protein S level and increased anticardiolipin IgG; he received coumadin for 3 months, with improvement.
Discussion
This patient from Africa presented with vomiting and epigastric pain, tachycardia, distended neck veins and distant heart sounds, and exhibited electrocardiographic abnormalities of diffuse ST-segment elevations and PR depressions with an enlarged heart on chest radiography, which was confirmed by echocardiography and computed tomography studies. This presentation is consistent with a diagnosis of pericardial disease. The severity and course of pericarditis can range from a sub-clinical condition to a life-threatening illness depending on the underlying etiology, which may include idiopathic causes (representing up to 40-86% of patients hospitalized with acute pericarditis and thought to be caused by as yet unidentified viruses [Knowlton et al 2009]) and the etiologies listed in the differential above. Large pericardial effusions are more likely to be caused by M. tuberculosis in patients in resource-poor countries (approximately 70%) than in patients in the industrialized world (4%) [Syed and Mayosi 2007]. In patients with HIV who live in regions endemic for tuberculosis (TB), TB causes more than 90 percent of pericardial effusions [Syed and Mayosi 2007]. In this patient from Africa, TB pericarditis was statistically the most likely etiology. Because of the implications for treatment and with a potential mortality rate ranging between 17%- 40% [Syed and Mayosi 2007], the diagnosis of TB pericarditis should be established expeditiously. A range of symptoms, signs and echocardiographic findings may occur. Symptoms may be nonspecific and not limited to the cardiovascular system, and a significant proportion may eventually be noted to have concomitant pulmonary TB as well. Multiple physical findings may be present, including tachycardia, distended neck veins, distant heart sounds, hypotension and, if tamponade is present, pulsus paradoxus. If TB is suspected in cases of pericarditis with effusion, pericardiocentesis should be performed. The pericardial fluid is most often exudative [Mayosi et al. 2005]. Histopathological and microbiological evaluation of pericardial tissue significantly aids in the diagnosis of TB pericarditis. Treatment includes close follow-up, with repetitive aspiration of pericardial effusion and, if constrictive pericarditis occurs, pericardectomy. Treatment with combination antituberculous therapy has been shown to dramatically reduce mortality, from 80-90% to 7-40% [Syed et al 2007, Wiysonge et al 2006]. Drug susceptibility testing is important given the high prevalence of multi-drug-resistant TB in some settings where TB is endemic. The role of corticosteroids in the treatment of TB pericarditis remains controversial [Ntsekhe et al 2003]. Although some studies have suggested a benefit to the use of steroids in TB pericardititis, many of the studies were performed in the pre-HIV era and are not large enough to draw definitive conclusions. The most recent TB treatment guidelines recommend treating TB pericarditis with corticosteroids unless drug resistance is suspected [WHO 2009]. Patients with HIV infection and TB pericarditis merit special consideration. There is conflicting data concerning whether or not patients with HIV infection have higher mortality rates from TB pericarditis, although many studies suggest that outcomes are comparable [Syed et al 2007]. HIV-infected patients with TB pericarditis may have higher relapse rates and drug interactions are an important consideration, especially with rifampin. The management of this patient posed additional challenges given his extensive underlying poly-drug resistance, which led to a significant extension of therapy as noted above.
Final Diagnosis
Tuberculous pericarditis caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, in a patient with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.
References
Knowlton KU, Oxman MN, Savoia MC, Chapter 81 Myocarditis and Pericarditis, in Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 7th edition, 2009, Elsevier Churchill Livingston Mayosi, B.M., Burgess, L.J., and Doubell, A.F. (2005). Tuberculous pericarditis. Circulation 112, 3608-3616.
PMID:16330703(PubMed abstract) Mayosi, B.M., Wiysonge, C.S., Ntsekhe, M., Gumedze, F., Volmink, J.A., Maartens, G., Aje, A., Thomas, B.M., Thomas, K.M., Awotedu, A.A., Thembela, B., Mntla, P., Maritz, F., Blackett, K.N., Nkouonlack, D.C., Burch, V.C., Rebe, K., Parrish, A., Sliwa, K., Vezi, B.Z., Alam, N., Brown, B.G., Gould, T., Visser, T., Magula, N.P., and Commerford, P.J. (2008). Mortality in patients treated for tuberculous pericarditis in sub-Saharan Africa. S Afr Med J 98, 36-40
PMID:18270639(PubMed abstract) Ntsekhe, M., Wiysonge, C., Volmink, J.A., Commerford, P.J., and Mayosi, B.M. (2003). Adjuvant corticosteroids for tuberculous pericarditis: promising, but not proven. QJM 96, 593-599
PMID:12897345(PubMed abstract) Syed, F.F., and Mayosi, B.M. (2007). A modern approach to tuberculous pericarditis. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 50, 218-236
PMID:17976506(PubMed abstract) Wiysonge et al. Excess mortality in presumed tuberculous pericarditis. Eur Heart J 2006;27:958. World Health Organization (WHO) Treatment of Tuberculosis: guidelines for national programmes. 2009, 4th edition. Last accessed on June 21, 2010 at http://www.who.int/tb/publications/tb_treatmentguidelines/en/index.html
Knowlton KU, Oxman MN, Savoia MC, Chapter 81 Myocarditis and Pericarditis, in Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 7th edition, 2009, Elsevier Churchill Livingston
Mayosi, B.M., Burgess, L.J., and Doubell, A.F. (2005). Tuberculous pericarditis. Circulation 112, 3608-3616.
PMID:16330703(PubMed abstract)
Mayosi, B.M., Wiysonge, C.S., Ntsekhe, M., Gumedze, F., Volmink, J.A., Maartens, G., Aje, A., Thomas, B.M., Thomas, K.M., Awotedu, A.A., Thembela, B., Mntla, P., Maritz, F., Blackett, K.N., Nkouonlack, D.C., Burch, V.C., Rebe, K., Parrish, A., Sliwa, K., Vezi, B.Z., Alam, N., Brown, B.G., Gould, T., Visser, T., Magula, N.P., and Commerford, P.J. (2008). Mortality in patients treated for tuberculous pericarditis in sub-Saharan Africa. S Afr Med J 98, 36-40
PMID:18270639(PubMed abstract)
Ntsekhe, M., Wiysonge, C., Volmink, J.A., Commerford, P.J., and Mayosi, B.M. (2003). Adjuvant corticosteroids for tuberculous pericarditis: promising, but not proven. QJM 96, 593-599
PMID:12897345(PubMed abstract)
Syed, F.F., and Mayosi, B.M. (2007). A modern approach to tuberculous pericarditis. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 50, 218-236
PMID:17976506(PubMed abstract)
Wiysonge et al. Excess mortality in presumed tuberculous pericarditis. Eur Heart J 2006;27:958.
World Health Organization (WHO) Treatment of Tuberculosis: guidelines for national programmes. 2009, 4th edition. Last accessed on June 21, 2010 at http://www.who.int/tb/publications/tb_treatmentguidelines/en/index.html
