History of Present Illness
Summary: A woman with a rash and fever following chemotherapy.
A middle-aged woman had a history of Hodgkin's disease that was diagnosed several decades earlier and breast cancer diagnosed one year before this presentation. A mastectomy had been performed and chemotherapy administered. There was metastatic spread to the chest wall, liver and kidneys.
Six months before this presentation, she began a clinical trial of oral vinorelbine and capecitabine. She had tolerated seven cycles well, without complications of neutropenia or fever.
Four weeks before her presentation, her pre-teen child had an acute illness with fevers and mouth sores that was thought to be Coxsackie virus. There was no skin exanthem.
The eighth cycle of chemotherapy began approximately two weeks before this admission and lasted eight days. On the fifth day of chemotherapy, she presented to a local emergency room with a temperature of 102°F (38.9°C) and general malaise. The white blood cell count (WBC) was 3,300 cells/mm³ with 81% polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Chest radiography and urinalysis were negative.
On the eighth day of the cycle, she was evaluated at a cancer center for intermittent fevers, mouth sores, and two vesicular lesions on the left forearm that were neither painful nor pruritic. Blood cultures and chest radiography were negative. The possibility of Coxsackie viral infection was considered and her dose of capecitabine was reduced.
The patient continued to have temperatures to 103.3°F (39.6°C), chills, and malaise. The rash gradually involved hands, trunks, arms and legs, and she also reported increasing oral and genital discomfort. She was re-evaluated by an oncologist on the fourteenth day, at which time she was found to have a white blood cell count of 500 cells/mm³ with 88% polymorphonuclear lymphocytes.
She was admitted to a community hospital, and the hospital course was complicated by persistent neutropenia, Streptococcus viridans bacteremia, elevated transaminases (aspartate aminotransferase 2692 U/L and alanine aminotransferase 329 U/L), encephalopathy and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC). Intravenous acyclovir was administered for possible disseminated varicella zoster virus (VZV); fluconazole 200 milligrams intravenous daily and meropenem one gram every eight hours were also administered. She was transferred to a tertiary hospital on the seventeenth day for further management.
Past Medical History
There was a history of breast cancer with metastatic disease and Hodgkin's lymphoma. The vaccination history was not known.
Medications
See above.
Social History
She was married, had children and lived with her family.
Epidemiological History
There was no history of tobacco or alcohol use. She lived in the northeastern United States and had previously resided in the northwestern United States.
Physical Examination
The patient was disoriented and delirious. The temperature was 96.6°F (35.9°C), blood pressure 106/64 mm Hg, pulse 109 beats per minute, and the oxygen saturation was 97% on three liters of oxygen per nasal cannula.
There was conjunctival injection with a mild whitish exudate. A severe oral mucositis was present, with a white exudate in soft palate consistent with thrush, and a few vesicular lesions visualized. The examination was limited due to pain. The neck was supple and there was no lymphadenopathy. There were bilateral rhonchi and decreased breath sounds at the left base. There were no cardiac murmurs, and the abdomen was soft with some voluntary guarding, and positive bowel sounds. There was no hepatomegaly or peripheral edema. The patient moved all four extremities, and had no meningismus or gaze preference.
There was a diffuse papulo-vesicular rash (Figures 1 through 3). Individual lesions had erythematous well-circumscribed ring-like borders, with a dark center, and involved the trunk, extremities, back, and face. All lesions appeared similar; there was no crusting, no erythematous base, and some lesions were coalescing. Palms and soles had a marked erythroderm, edema and exfoliation. Discrete bullae were present on the soles and were very tender to touch.
Figure 1. Skin lesions.
Figure 2. Skin lesions.
Figure 3. Skin lesions.
Studies
Chest radiographs showed left-sided air-space disease, with bronchograms suggestive of pneumonia, and pulmonary edema throughout the right lung. Computed tomography (CT) scanning of the head was normal.
Laboratory testing revealed a white blood count of 200 cells/mm³ (84% lymphocytes, 12% monocytes), platelets 133,000/mm³, hematocrit 27.9%, prothrombin time 44 seconds, INR 2.2, fibrinogen 332 mg/dL, partial thromboplastin time 52 seconds, and D-dimer >5000 mg/L. The urea nitrogen (BUN) was 28 mg/dL and the creatinine 0.9 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 4818 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 455 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 688 U/L, total bilirubin 1.2mg/dL, creatine kinase 9385 U/L. The urinalysis had 40 red blood cells, no white blood cells, and some granular casts.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) from a skin biopsy was positive for herpes simplex virus (HSV).
Treatment and Followup
Intravenous acyclovir was administered. The patient improved clinically and the neutropenia resolved.
Discussion
Herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) and HSV-2 are distributed worldwide and the seroprevalence in adults reaches approximately 80–95% for HSV-1 and 20–25% for HSV-2. Disseminated Herpes simplex virus has been well described in immunocompromised patients, especially in those with defects in cell- mediated immunity: patients undergoing chemotherapy and organ transplant patients among others. Without preventive antiviral drug treatment, HSV reactivation occurs in about 65–80% of seropositive patients receiving induction chemotherapy for acute leukemia or an allogeneic stem cell transplant.
The most common manifestation of HSV infection is mucocutaneous disease. The characteristic skin lesions are papules and grouped vesicles on an erythematous base. Patients may also develop localized pain, tingling, burning and paresthesias before the formation of skin lesions. Systemic symptoms such as fever, headache, anorexia and malaise may occur, especially during primary infection.
In addition to extensive mucocutaneous infections, HSV may disseminate to visceral organs and cause hepatitis, pneumonitis, adenitis and encephalitis. Intravenous acyclovir is the therapy of choice for severe mucocutaneous or visceral HSV disease in immunocompromised hosts. If initiated early in the disease course, it may significantly shorten the duration of virus shedding and pain, and induce more rapid healing of the lesion.
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated herpes simplex virus (HSV) in the setting of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia in a patient with Hodgkin's disease.
References
Herget, G.W., Riede, U.N., Schmitt-Graff, A., Lubbert, M., Neumann-Haefelin, D., and Kohler, G. (2005). Generalized herpes simplex virus infection in an immunocompromised patient--report of a case and review of the literature. Pathol Res Pract 201, 123-129.
PMID:15901133(PubMed abstract)
