History of Present Illness
A man in his fifties presented with one week of subjective fever and malaise. He was in his usual state of health until one week prior to presentation when he developed subjective fever, palpitations, and left-sided facial pain involving the jaw and temple. He reported persistent tachycardia noted by his health-monitoring watch. Six days prior to presentation, he sought evaluation at an emergency department, and amoxicillin was empirically administered for odontogenic infection of an upper left molar. Three days prior to presentation, the molar was extracted, and the left-sided facial pain resolved. Subjective fever and tachycardia continued despite adherence to amoxicillin. These symptoms were accompanied by malaise, night sweats, chills, and dark urine. He denied rigors, joint pain, rash, dysuria, diarrhea, cough, and dyspnea. Due to persistent fever and malaise, he again presented to the emergency department.
Past Medical History
None
Medications
Amoxicillin
Allergies
None
Social History
He worked at an office job and lived in the northeastern United States. He had no significant travel history aside from trips to Western Europe. He was in a monogamous relationship with one female partner but was not sexually active in recent months. No animal exposures aside from contact with his partner’s pet dog. He reported 1-2 standard drinks daily and did not use other substances. No history of incarceration, or homelessness.
Epidemiological History
He had one remote episode of treated gonorrhea and no prior contact with active tuberculosis cases..
Physical Examination
He was non-toxic appearing, flushed, and supplemental oxygen was being delivered via nasal cannula. The blood pressure was 137/77 mm Hg, pulse 102 beats per minute, temperature 100 degrees Fahrenheit (37.8 degrees Celsius), and respirations 20 breaths per minute (pulse oximetry with oxygen saturation 95% on 5 liters nasal cannula). There were several dental fillings, but no tenderness to palpation or swelling was noted along gingival surfaces. No thrush was visualized in the oropharynx. There was palpable anterior cervical lymphadenopathy in addition to a palpable, mobile lymph node in the left axilla. Cardiac examination was notable for tachycardia. Pulmonary examination identified bibasilar crackles. There were faint macules noted across the chest, abdomen, and back. The examination was otherwise normal.
Studies
A basic metabolic panel noted normal renal function. Total bilirubin was 1.5 mg/dL (reference range 0.0-1.0), with a direct component of 1.1 mg/dL (reference range 0.0-0.4). Aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase were 235 U/L (reference range 10-40) and 346 U/L (reference range 10-55), respectively. The alkaline phosphatase was 250 U/L (reference range 45-115). Complete blood count with differential identified hemoglobin 12.9 g/dL (reference range for men 13.5-17.5 g/dL), platelets 130,000/mcL (reference range 150-400 x 10 3 /mcL), and white blood cells 6790/mcL (reference range 4.5-11 x 10 3 /mcL) with 17% atypical lymphocytes (reference range 0%). The N-terminal pro-hormone brain natriuretic peptide was 868 pg/mL (reference range 0-900 pg/mL). A chest radiograph identified pulmonary interstitial edema. Computed tomography scans of the neck and face were performed with intravenous contrast and identified prominent palatine tonsils with a right-sided 6 mm low-attenuation region in addition to several enlarged cervical lymph nodes. Computed tomography scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis were also performed with intravenous contrast and identified multifocal groundglass and consolidative opacities within both lungs, small volume bilateral pleural effusions, and mediastinal and bilateral axillary lymphadenopathy. No hepatosplenomegaly was noted. A respiratory pathogen polymerase chain reaction panel was negative, as was polymerase chain reaction-based testing for SARS-CoV-2. A respiratory sputum culture grew normal flora, and no organisms were visualized on Gram stain. Serological tests for hepatitis A virus and hepatitis B virus were negative. A real-time polymerase chain reaction test for hepatitis C virus found an undetectable viral load. Urine legionella and histoplasma antigen tests were negative. Two sets of blood cultures were collected and did not demonstrate growth after seven days of incubation.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
In the emergency department, he was placed on supplemental oxygen due to hypoxemia. Azithromycin, piperacillin-tazobactam, and vancomycin were empirically administered. Antimicrobial therapy was transitioned to ceftriaxone and doxycycline on hospital day one. The following day, antimicrobial therapy was narrowed to doxycycline, and diuresis with furosemide was initiated. The same day, a mildly pruritic, morbilliform rash (Figure 1) developed on the chest (Figure 2), back (Figure 3), abdomen, upper arms, and upper thighs.
Figure 1. Physical exam finding. Dense, erythematous, maculopapular eruption
Figure 2. Physical exam finding. Morbilliform eruption along chest wall and abdomen
Figure 3. Physical exam finding. Morbilliform eruption along back and flanks
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Two days after the morbilliform eruption, serological testing for Epstein-Barr virus resulted with positive viral capsid antigen IgM (>160.00 U/mL; reference range >43.99 U/mL positive, <36.00 U/mL negative), negative viral capsid antigen IgG (<18.00 U/mL; reference range <18.00 U/mL negative), and negative nuclear antigen IgG (<18.00 U/mL; reference range <18.00 U/mL negative). A diagnosis of primary Epstein-Barr virus infection was made. Earlier in the admission, serological testing for cytomegalovirus IgG and IgM was negative, as was serum polymerase chain reaction for cytomegalovirus. A fourth-generation screening test for human immunodeficiency virus was negative. Due to concern for drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), a human herpes virus-6 viral load was also checked and not detected.
Treatment and Followup
Doxycycline was discontinued after diagnosis of primary Epstein-Barr virus infection. Topical steroid therapies and oral anti-histamine agents were used for the morbilliform rash. He received one dose of vancomycin on hospital day five after blood cultures (collected on hospital day two) grew Gram positive cocci in 1 of 4 bottles, but vancomycin was discontinued due to clinical suspicion for a contaminant. Indeed, the bacterium was subsequently identified as Staphylococcus capitis. Due to ongoing hypoxemia requiring nasal cannula, intravenous diuresis was continued. A transthoracic echocardiogram identified normal biventricular function, and a computed tomography pulmonary angiogram did not identify a pulmonary embolus. After several days of intravenous diuresis and supportive therapies, he was discharged on hospital day thirteen without need for supplemental oxygen.
Discussion
The diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis was strongly suggested by the symptom constellation (fever, fatigue, generalized lymphadenopathy, etc.) and laboratory findings (atypical lymphocytosis, mild transaminitis) at presentation, and further reinforced by the subsequent morbilliform eruption after use of amoxicillin. These symptoms were preceded by an odontogenic infection, which proved to be a red herring. In general, the differential diagnosis for infectious mononucleosis includes acute Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis, and human immunodeficiency virus. There were no reports of uncooked meat or extensive animal exposure to suggest acute toxoplasmosis, and the patient had no risk factors elicited on history for recent acquisition of human immunodeficiency virus. Cytomegalovirus was considered due to its lower seroprevalence in the adult population (estimated >50% of adults age 40 and above in the United States) [1], but the serological diagnosis was found to be primary EBV infection. This is uncommonly encountered in middle aged adults given that >90% of adults worldwide are estimated to be seropositive for EBV. [2] The patient’s hypoxemic respiratory failure was ultimately attributed to non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema and may have represented capillary leak in the setting of systemic inflammation. EBV pneumonitis has been reported, but it is exceedingly rare. [3] Importantly, DRESS can also present with the same constellation of symptoms; however, the time course from drug initiation to eruption was deemed too short to be compatible with this diagnosis (DRESS usually occurs at minimum 14 days after drug initiation). Additionally, a human herpesvirus-6 viral load, which can be positive in the setting of DRESS [4], was checked and not detected.
Interestingly, the patient developed the classic morbilliform rash after use of an aminopenicillin in the setting of primary EBV infection. [5] He received other beta-lactam agents (piperacillin-tazobactam and ceftriaxone) before the morbilliform rash emerged, but his recent use of amoxicillin was the most likely culprit. The mechanism of this phenomenon has not been definitively established, but some theorize it is mediated by temporary loss of immune tolerance to aminopenicillins due to ongoing immune stimulation driven by EBV. Historical reports on EBV-associated aminopenicillin rash estimated its occurrence in 90-100% of pediatric cases of acute EBV in which ampicillin was administered. More recent datasets have identified markedly lower numbers. [6,7] For example, one pediatric series reported the incidence of antibiotic-associated rash as 29.5% (compared to the historical ≥90%) in children who received amoxicillin during acute EBV. In general, the rash is not perceived to be a true drug allergy, and most patients are able to tolerate the medication in the future.
Final Diagnosis
Primary Epstein-Barr virus infection
References
Fowler K, Mucha J, Neumann M, et al. A systematic literature review of the global seroprevalence of cytomegalovirus: possible implications for treatment, screening, and vaccine development. BMC Public Health. 2022;22(1):1659.
PMID:36050659(PubMed abstract) Luzuriaga K, Sullivan JL. Infectious mononucleosis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(21):1993-2000
PMID:20505178(PubMed abstract) Haller A, von Segesser L, Baumann PC, Krause M. Severe respiratory insufficiency complicating Epstein-Barr virus infection: case report and review. Clin Infect Dis. 1995;21(1):206-9.
PMID:7578734(PubMed abstract) Shiohara T, Iijima M, Ikezawa Z, Hashimoto K. The diagnosis of a DRESS syndrome has been sufficiently established on the basis of typical clinical features and viral reactivations. Br J Dermatol. 2007;156(5):1083-4.
PMID:17381452(PubMed abstract) Chovel-Sella A, Ben Tov A, Lahav E, et al. Incidence of rash after amoxicillin treatment in children with infectious mononucleosis. Pediatrics. 2013;131(5):e1424-7.
PMID:23589810(PubMed abstract)
Fowler K, Mucha J, Neumann M, et al. A systematic literature review of the global seroprevalence of cytomegalovirus: possible implications for treatment, screening, and vaccine development. BMC Public Health. 2022;22(1):1659.
PMID:36050659(PubMed abstract)
Luzuriaga K, Sullivan JL. Infectious mononucleosis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(21):1993-2000
PMID:20505178(PubMed abstract)
Haller A, von Segesser L, Baumann PC, Krause M. Severe respiratory insufficiency complicating Epstein-Barr virus infection: case report and review. Clin Infect Dis. 1995;21(1):206-9.
PMID:7578734(PubMed abstract)
Shiohara T, Iijima M, Ikezawa Z, Hashimoto K. The diagnosis of a DRESS syndrome has been sufficiently established on the basis of typical clinical features and viral reactivations. Br J Dermatol. 2007;156(5):1083-4.
PMID:17381452(PubMed abstract)
Chovel-Sella A, Ben Tov A, Lahav E, et al. Incidence of rash after amoxicillin treatment in children with infectious mononucleosis. Pediatrics. 2013;131(5):e1424-7.
PMID:23589810(PubMed abstract)
