History of Present Illness
2006 January Featured Case Summary: A man from the Middle East presented with fever, chills and low back pain.
A man in his sixties had undergone diskectomy of the 4th-5th lumbar disc (L4-L5) for disc herniation with radiculopathy more than fifteen years earlier. He did well until approximately ten years later, when his symptoms recurred. Disc repair of the L5-S1 disc was performed (without placement of hardware or prosthetic material) and his symptoms resolved.
Approximately six months before presentation, he developed fevers to 102-104°F (38.9-40.0°C), chills and headache of two weeks duration. No source of infection was identified; amoxicillin-clavulanate was administered and the fevers and chills resolved. The patient never returned fully to his normal state, however, and over the following months lost five kilograms due to anorexia and aesthenia.
Approximately two months prior to his presentation, intermittent lower back pain recurred. The pain slowly progressed and became chronic and unrelenting. One month after the pain had returned, the patient was seen as an out-patient, where examination revealed a stiff lumbar spine with normal neurological function. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were administered and the symptoms improved but did not resolve.
Four days later, the patient was awakened at night due to the pain. During the following week, fever to 102°F (38.9°C) and daily rigors developed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine, though difficult to interpret due to his previous surgeries, suggested abnormal enhancement of the L4-L5 disc, L4 and L5 vertebral bodies and a soft tissue mass anterior to the vertebrae at this level. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 53 millimeters per hour; tuberculosis skin testing and blood cultures were negative. Computed tomography (CT) guided needle aspiration showed polymorphonuclear cells and gram-negative rods by gram stain; the culture was negative. Pathological staining for acid fast bacilli and fungi were negative, as were cultures for these organisms.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, ciprofloxacin and doxycycline were given for two weeks and the patient defervesced. At the completion of the course of antibiotics, he was found to have persistent back pain with new sciatic symptoms and absent patellar and ankle reflexes on the left. A repeat MRI scan showed increased size of the paravertebral collection at the level of the L5 vertebra. The patient traveled to the United States for further evaluation and treatment.
Past Medical History
The past medical history included the lumbar-sacral surgery as noted above, benign prostatic hypertrophy and hyperlipidemia.
Medications
See the history above for recent antimicrobial treatment.
Epidemiological History
The patient was from the Middle East, where he lived in an urban area. He had eaten cheeses while in Europe several months earlier. He had no animal or chemical exposure, no known exposure to tuberculosis, and no one in his family or other contacts was ill.
Physical Examination
The blood pressure was 130/80 mm Hg, pulse 64 beats per minute, respirations 12 breaths per minute and the temperature was normal. The neurologic examination revealed normal cognition and mood, full sensation and motor strength. There was point tenderness over the lumbar spine with associated paravertebral muscle spasm. The left patellar tendon and ankle reflexes were absent; the toes were down-going bilaterally. Straight leg raising and rectal tone were normal; there was no clonus. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 5,100 cells/mm³ (53% leukocytes, 39% lymphocytes, 6% monocytes, 1% eosinophils and 1% basophils). The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 80 millimeters per hour. Serum chemistry tests were normal. Blood cultures, drawn when the patient was off antibiotics, were negative. An MRI scan of the spine (Figure 1) showed a high signal intensity at the fifth lumbar (L5) vertebra with extension into the L4-5 disk space and the lower half of the L4 vertebra. There were signal changes involving the soft tissue anterior to the L4-5 and the upper part of first sacral (S1) vertebrae as well as over the posterior longitudinal ligament area with no significant pressure on the dura or on the nerve roots. These areas enhanced with gadolinium.
Figure 1. MRI scan of the spine.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A laminectomy (posterior approach) at the level of the L4 vertebra with decompression and aspiration of the epidural abscess produced free-flowing malodorous purulent material. Gram stain of the aspirate is shown in Figure 2. Pathological samples from an open biopsy of the L5 vertebra are shown in Figures 3 and 4.
Figure 2. Primary gram stain of aspirate.
Figure 3. Biopsy of L5 vertebra.
Figure 4. Detail of Figure 3.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
MRI scans with gadolinium, which showed T2 hyperintensity and enhancement of the L4-L5 disc, the anterior inferior endplate of the L4 vertebral body and the entire L5 vertebral body, were consistent with osteomyelitis and discitis. There was also a round enhancing lesion consistent with phlegmon in the left anterior epidural space extending from L4—S1 with thecal compression and encasement of the L4 and L5 nerve roots (Figure 1).
A laminectomy (posterior approach) at L4 and decompression and aspiration of the epidural abscess produced free-flowing malodorous purulent material. On gram stain, surgical specimens had rare polymorphonuclear leukocytes; no organisms were seen (Figure 2). Gross pathology confirmed acute and chronic osteomyelitis and acute discitis. Pathological examination with Brown-Hopps and Giemsa stains of material from an open biopsy of the L5 vertebra showed focal epithelioid histiocytes with intracellular coccobacilli consistent with Brucella species (shown in Figure 5).
All operative cultures, including the abscess collection, disk and bone grew small gram negative coccobacilli, which were identified as Brucella melitensis biovar 3 by the Center for Disease Control (CDC). (See Figures 6 and 7.) These organisms were grown on a Brucella agar plate with horse blood (Figure 8). A urease slant, treated with Brucella, was positive, and is shown in Figure 9 on the right (negative control on the left).
The Brucella standard agglutination test, performed by the state laboratory, was positive with a titer of 1:320. Testing for Brucella antibodies was also positive (titers of the IgM component 1:320 and IgG 1:640). Tuberculosis skin testing was negative.
Figure 5. Detail of L5 biopsy.
Figure 6. Gram stain of culture.
Figure 7. Detail of Figure 6.
Figure 8. Brucella colonies on horse blood agar plate.
Figure 9. Urease slants, Brucella inoculate on right.
Treatment and Followup
As noted above, surgical decompression and drainage of the epidural abscess, an L4 laminectomy for epidural abscess and an open biopsy of the L5 vertebrae were performed.
Vancomycin and gentamicin were given initially and then the vancomycin was discontinued and rifampin and doxycycline were added. He was discharged to complete a three-week course of intravenous gentamicin and a three-month course of doxycycline and rifampin. The patient improved, with increased strength and decreased pain.
Discussion
The constellation of fever and back pain should immediately alert the physician to the possibility of vertebral osteomyelitis. Infection of the vertebrae usually begins by hematogenous seeding of the poorly vascularized bone with contiguous spread to the discs and surrounding tissues, which can include the psoas muscles and aorta anteriorly, and the epidural space with spinal cord compression posteriorly. Tissue that has been compromised by injury or previous surgery is more likely to become a site for potential infection, as was illustrated in this case.
In the United States, the most common causes of vertebral osteomyelitis include routine bacterial and fungal pathogens which can be introduced into the bloodstream by intravenous drug use, a chronic in-dwelling line, or systemic infection such as endocarditis. Staphylococcal species are the most common pathogen in this setting, and Streptococcal species, gram-negative pathogens and Candida species are also quite common. Worldwide, pyogenic vertebral abscess must be differentiated from tuberculosis and brucellosis. While all of these can infect any part of the spine, thoracic involvement is more commonly associated with Pott’s disease while Brucella and pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis are most commonly seen in the lumbar spine. Brucellosis, also called undulant, Mediterranean, or Malta fever, is a zoonotic disease that remains endemic worldwide and is an important source of morbidity primarily in the Mediterranean basin, Arabian peninsula, India, Central and South America. Brucella species are aerobic, non-encapsulated facultative gram-negative coccobacilli.
As a zoonosis, infection is acquired through exposure to animals and their products with goat and sheep herders, veterinarians, abattoir workers, farmers and laboratory personnel at highest risk. It can be acquired through aerosol or ingestion and consumption of unpasteurized cheeses—this was the likely mode of transmission in the case above. Once exposed, the bacteria localize within the reticulo-endothelial system and evade the immune system.
Brucellosis is a systemic infection and can manifest in numerous ways which includes a non-specific prolonged febrile illness (it is a well-established cause of fever of unknown origin), neurobrucellosis, epididymo-orchitis, endocarditis, splenomegaly, pneumonitis, prosthetic hardware infection, and pyogenic abscess formation of various organs. The most common localization is in the osteoarticular system, described in 10-30% of patients, and includes sacroiliitis, septic arthritis, tenosynovitis, spondylitis, bursitis and osteomyelitis.
Diagnosis is made by serologic testing with the standard agglutination test (SAT), which is a tube agglutination assay. This is the standard test in the United States. Blood, synovial tissue, bone, or abscess drainage can be cultured for Brucella, although the cultures require special media. Treatment includes combination therapy utilizing fluoroquinolones, trimethoprim-sulfa, rifampin, aminoglycosides and tetracyclines.
Final Diagnosis
Osteomyelitis, discitis and paravertebral abscess due to Brucella melitensis biovar 3.
References
