History of Present Illness
Figure 1. Figure 1A. Initial left groin lesion
Figure 1A. Initial left groin lesion
Past Medical History
Coronary artery disease; peripheral vascular disease requiring left iliac stents; tuberculosis (> 20 years ago).
Medications
Aspirin, carvedilol.
Allergies
She is allergic to penicillin, ciprofloxacin and tetracyclines.
Epidemiological History
She is originally from the southern United States but previously lived on the west coast. She then moved to the Midwest US where she worked in healthcare. She smoked heavily for many years, but quit > 10 years ago. She denied any recent travel, recreational drug use, or alcohol use. She has dogs and is fond of gardening.
Physical Examination
Figure 1A. Initial left groin lesion
Studies
Initial MRI of the brain and labs were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies were notable for 2 white blood cells (WBC) per microliter, 0 red blood cells (RBC) per microliter, glucose 59 mg per deciliter, protein 32 mg per deciliter. CT abdomen and pelvis revealed enlarged left inguinal and left external iliac retroperitoneal lymph nodes. CSF venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) test, Borrelia IgG/IgM, Herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR), St. Louis encephalitis IgG/IgM, Mumps IgG/IgM, Rubeola IgG/IgM, Varicella IgG and West Nile IgG/IgM all returned negative. Tickborne serologies, including Babesia microti IgG/IgM, Lyme disease total antibody, Ehrlichia IgG/IgM, Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever IgG/IgM and Francisella tularensis IgG/IgM, were negative.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
On admission to the regional hospital, her labs were only notable for a C-reactive protein 6.2 mg per liter (normal range < 1.0). Her left groin lesion was now larger and ulcerated with surrounding erythema and inguinal lymphadenopathy. An excisional biopsy was performed.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Culture from the excisional biopsy grew Francisella tularensis. Her serum Francisella tularensis IgG/IgM from the regional hospital also returned positive at 1:320. She was discharged on a 10-day course of streptomycin injections for ulceroglandular tularemia.
The patient’s fevers resolved, but she suffered a fall after discharge and returned to the hospital. MRI brain (Figure 2: B, C) showed multiple small, peripherally enhancing lesions throughout both cerebral hemispheres, the largest being 6 mm in size. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiograms were negative for vegetations and repeat blood cultures were negative. She had previously undergone a lumbar puncture (LP) with normal CSF studies at the local hospital, so this was not repeated.
Figure 2. B shows axial T1 weighted post-contrast MRI image depicting multiple enhancing cerebral lesions consistent with disseminated tularemia. Figure 2C shows a sagittal view T1 weighted post-contrast MRI depicting multiple ring-enhancing lesions. Figure 2D is from the final MRI showing residual lesions after completed therapy.
Treatment and Followup
She completed the 10-day streptomycin course at the regional hospital and was discharged home with plans for a follow-up MRI brain at a later date.
The patient presented to our hospital three weeks later due to persistent weakness, fatigue, gait instability, dizziness and headaches. Repeat MRI brain showed slightly decreased size of all cerebral lesions, the largest now 5 mm in diameter, and improved vasogenic edema. CSF studies showed 1 WBC per microliter, 1 RBC per microliter, total protein 30 mg per deciliter and glucose 47 mg per deciliter with a negative gram stain and cultures. Intravenous gentamicin was initiated. Doxycycline was not recommended due to prior allergy. The patient tolerated an oral ciprofloxacin dose-escalation challenge after a previous intolerance was reported. She was discharged on dual gentamicin and ciprofloxacin therapy.
At her 3-week follow-up appointment, she had developed arthralgias concerning for fluoroquinolone-associated tendinitis and mild left-sided hearing loss concerning for aminoglycoside-associated ototoxicity. MRI brain revealed further decreased size of all lesions by 1-2mm. Ciprofloxacin was discontinued, and the patient elected to continue gentamicin. Otolaryngology evaluation confirmed mild, left ear high-frequency hearing loss. Her dizziness, gait and strength improved with physical and vestibular therapy. Her 6-week follow-up MRI brain demonstrated improvement in the size and radiographic density of all lesions, the largest now 2 mm, and gentamicin was discontinued (Figure 2D).
Discussion
Francisella tularensis, a gram-negative coccobacillus, is the causative agent of tularemia. Infected animals, arthropod vectors, soil and water serve as reservoirs. Transmission can occur by direct contact, ingestion and inhalation. It is considered a grade A bioterrorism agent due to its low infectious dose, ease of distribution and ability to cause fatal disease [1].
In the United States (U.S.), tularemia is most common in south central U.S., the Pacific Northwest and Massachusetts. There are two biovars of F. tularensis. Biovar A (F. tularensis subspecies tularensis) causes the majority of U.S. cases and accounts for more severe presentations. Biovar B (F. tularensis subspecies palearctica) causes milder cases in Europe and Asia [2].
Tularemia incubation is usually 3-5 days but can extend up to 14 days. Symptoms often include fever, malaise, chills and headache. Ulceroglandular, glandular, oropharyngeal and oculoglandular presentations typically occur via direct inoculation and present with fever and regional lymphadenopathy. Pneumonic tularemia typically occurs after inhalation of aerosols and presents with fever and pulmonary infiltrates. Typhoidal tularemia is rare and presents with fever and a variety of symptoms. Less common but more complicated forms of tularemia include pleuropneumonia, meningitis and endocarditis [1].
Francisella tularensis infection presenting with cerebral abscesses is extremely rare, with only two cases reported in the medical literature. In 2006, Gangat reported a case of cerebral microabscesses complicating tularemia meningitis in a 51-year-old female from Kansas. She presented with a one-month history of fever, headache and abdominal pain after eating wild rabbit that progressed to respiratory distress and encephalopathy. MRI brain demonstrated multiple 6-8 mm cerebral microabscesses. CSF studies revealed 2926 WBC per microliter, protein 1890 mg per deciliter, glucose 33 mg per deciliter, and culture grew F. tularensis. She was treated with 10 days of streptomycin followed by one year of doxycycline, but overall outcome was unknown [3].
Van de Beek et al (2007) described tularemia-associated brain abscesses in 2007. A 51-year-old female presented with fever, headache, blurred vision and altered consciousness after eating wild rabbits. CSF examination revealed 450 WBC/uL and a positive CSF culture for F. tularensis. MRI brain demonstrated three lesions with restricted diffusion. She was treated with streptomycin and doxycycline and her outcome at one year was poor [4].
Tularemia can be diagnosed by many different methods. Culture of blood, sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage or lymph node tissue has poor sensitivity [2]. PCR antigen detection, direct immunofluorescence antibody testing, immunohistochemical staining and RNA hybridization with 16S ribosomal probe have all been described. Acute and convalescent serologies with a 4-fold rise in antibody titer are the most common means of diagnosis with sensitivity approaching 85% [2]. Diagnosing tularemia can be difficult, in part due to the broad differential diagnoses of lymphadenopathy such as HIV, Epstein-Barr Virus, cytomegalovirus, mycobacterium, toxoplasmosis, syphilis, histoplasmosis, coccidiomycosis, cryptococcosis, sarcoidosis, Castleman disease and malignancy. A high index of suspicion for tularemia remains the most essential component of diagnosis.
Treatment of tularemia consists of doxycycline or ciprofloxacin for mild and moderate disease and streptomycin or gentamicin for severe disease. Duration of treatment is typically 7-10 days. Meningitis treatment is extended to 14-21 days and includes a combination of an aminoglycoside plus ciprofloxacin, doxycycline or chloramphenicol [1].
Most bacterial brain abscesses require 6-8 weeks of antimicrobial therapy [5]. In our case, gentamicin was chosen over streptomycin due to the availability of drug level testing. Doxycycline was avoided due to the patient’s previous Stevens-Johnson-like reaction. Ciprofloxacin was started to provide more optimal combination therapy.
Unfortunately, aminoglycosides and fluroquinolones produce their own therapeutic challenges. Aminoglycosides often have dose-dependent toxic effects [6]. Adverse effects of fluoroquinolone use include, but are not limited to, Clostridioides difficile -associated diarrhea, liver injury, seizures, prolonged QT interval, tendinitis, tendon rupture, phototoxicity, aortic aneurysm rupture and renal failure [7]. Our patient developed tendinitis necessitating cessation of ciprofloxacin, left-sided ototoxicity, mild nephrotoxicity and vestibular toxicity. Fortunately, her lesions substantially improved, and a 6-week gentamicin course was tolerated.
The rarity of disseminated tularemia causing brain abscesses limits the availability of evidence-based recommendations to guide treatment. Combination aminoglycoside therapy with doxycycline, ciprofloxacin or chloramphenicol may offer the greatest likelihood of successful treatment for complicated tularemia cases. This case demonstrated initial treatment with streptomycin alone, followed by combination gentamicin and ciprofloxacin and then gentamicin monotherapy, highlighting how tailoring a treatment regimen to each patient is essential to a successful outcome.
Final Diagnosis
Tularemia complicated by brain abscesses
References
Yeni DK, Buyuk F, Ashraf A, Shah M. Tularemia: A Re-emerging tick-borne infectious disease. Folia Microbiol (Praha) 2020.
PMID:32989563(PubMed abstract) Diaz JH. Ticks, Including Tick Paralysis. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Elsevier, 2020: 3505-26.e4. Gagat N. Cerebral abscesses complicating tularemia meningitis. Scand J Infect Dis 2007; 39(3): 258-61.
PMID:17366059(PubMed abstract) Van de Beek D SJ, Marshall WF, Kijpittayarit S, Wijdicks EF. Tularemia with brain abscesses. Neurology 2007 Feb; 68(7): 531.
PMID:17296921(PubMed abstract) Gea-Banacloche JC, Tunkel, AR. Brain Abscess. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Elsevier, 2020: 1248-61.e4. Rosenberg CR, Fang X, Allison KR. Potentiating aminoglycoside antibiotics to reduce their toxic side effects. PLoS One 2020; 15(9): e0237948.
PMID:32877437(PubMed abstract) Kuula LSM, Viljemaa KM, Backman JT, Blom M. Fluoroquinolone-related adverse events resulting in health service use and costs: A systematic review. PLoS One 2019; 14(4): e0216029.
PMID:31026286(PubMed abstract)
Yeni DK, Buyuk F, Ashraf A, Shah M. Tularemia: A Re-emerging tick-borne infectious disease. Folia Microbiol (Praha) 2020.
PMID:32989563(PubMed abstract)
Diaz JH. Ticks, Including Tick Paralysis. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Elsevier, 2020: 3505-26.e4.
Gagat N. Cerebral abscesses complicating tularemia meningitis. Scand J Infect Dis 2007; 39(3): 258-61.
PMID:17366059(PubMed abstract)
Van de Beek D SJ, Marshall WF, Kijpittayarit S, Wijdicks EF. Tularemia with brain abscesses. Neurology 2007 Feb; 68(7): 531.
PMID:17296921(PubMed abstract)
Gea-Banacloche JC, Tunkel, AR. Brain Abscess. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Elsevier, 2020: 1248-61.e4.
Rosenberg CR, Fang X, Allison KR. Potentiating aminoglycoside antibiotics to reduce their toxic side effects. PLoS One 2020; 15(9): e0237948.
PMID:32877437(PubMed abstract)
Kuula LSM, Viljemaa KM, Backman JT, Blom M. Fluoroquinolone-related adverse events resulting in health service use and costs: A systematic review. PLoS One 2019; 14(4): e0216029.
PMID:31026286(PubMed abstract)
