History of Present Illness
Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A woman with HIV infection and cough, dyspnea on exertion and fevers.
A woman in her forties, with a history of human immunodeficiency virus (Background medical information such as HIV status is important to include early in the history, since it greatly changes the differential diagnosis. An HIV person with cough and fever is at high risk for ordinary infections such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, but compared to the general population is at much more increased risk of opportunistic infections such as Pneumocystis or tuberculosis.) (HIV) infection, was admitted to the hospital with fevers and dyspnea. She had been well until approximately 6 weeks (The tempo of symptoms provides important diagnostic clues. All common bacterial and viral infections of the lungs would earlier have resolved or become obvious within a couple of weeks. This prolonged course suggests fungal or mycobacterial infection, or non-infectious causes.) earlier when she noted fatigue. During the following month, fevers, dry cough (Typical bacterial pneumonia will often cause cough productive of purulent sputum. A dry cough suggests viral, fungal, or atypical bacteria.), and dyspnea on exertion developed gradually. Two weeks before admission, she was seen in an emergency department. A chest radiograph (Cough and fever with a normal chest radiograph would suggest bronchitis in a normal host, and should be treated symptomatically, rather than with antibiotics. With HIV, this pattern should always raise concern for Pneumocystic jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) or TB and a microbiological diagnosis must be sought, rather than the institution of empiric therapy.) (Figure 1) was normal. Levofloxacin (A quinolone antibiotic with good activity against most respiratory pathogens. It has some activity against TB and may thus confuse or delay the diagnosis.) was prescribed for a 10-day course, however she only took a 5-day course of the medication.
Thirteen days after her initial visit, and 6 days after the antibiotic was taken, she was seen in an outpatient infectious disease clinic because of increasing shortness of breath and cough, associated with dyspnea on exertion, fevers, headaches, and chills. She had paroxysms of cough (Fits of coughing are seen more commonly with certain pathogens, such as Bordatella pertussis.) intermittently and diarrhea (Extra-pulmonary signs can be a clue since certain pathogens such as Legionella or Mycoplasma can have prominent symptoms outside the lungs.) once or twice daily. There was no photophobia or stiff neck.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph 13 days before admission.
Past Medical History
More than 10 years earlier, HIV infection had been diagnosed. One year before her presentation, the CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count was 81 cells per microliter and the plasma level of HIV RNA was 273,000 copies per milliliter. Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) that included tenofovir, emtricitabine, atazanavir and ritonavir (TDF/FTC/ATV/RTV) was begun. The CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count increased to 690 cells per microliter and the level of HIV RNA became undetectable. Approximately 2.5 months before admission, scleral icterus occurred and she discontinued the medications. Ten days before admission, the CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count was 203 cells per microliter (Risk of opportunistic infections begins to rise rapidly once CD4 counts go below 200 cells per microliter.) (23%).
One year earlier, anemia of uncertain etiology had been noted, with a normal level of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase. There was a history of aphthous ulcers.
Allergies
She was allergic to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole would be the main drug used for PJP prophylaxis, but HIV patients have a higher rate of sulfa allergy.), which had caused a rash, and possibly to dapsone. Erythromycin had caused gastrointestinal distress.
Epidemiological History
She worked in a medically related field. She did not drink alcohol or use illicit drugs, and denied recent travel or exposures to animals.
Physical Examination
She appeared ill and tremulous, with frequent coughing. The temperature was 102°F (38.9°C) and rose to 103.9°F (39.9°C), blood pressure 116/60 mm Hg, pulse 76 beats per minute, respirations 22 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 92%-96% (An oxygen saturation level this low in a young person breathing this fast suggests a substantial A-a gradient.) while breathing ambient air. There was conjunctival icterus; the left tympanic membrane revealed a fluid level and the right ear canal was impacted with cerumen. Crackles were heard in the lungs bilaterally, and the remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
A chest radiograph (Cough and fever with a normal chest radiograph would suggest bronchitis in a normal host, and should be treated symptomatically, rather than with antibiotics. With HIV, this pattern should always raise concern for Pneumocystic jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) or TB and a microbiological diagnosis must be sought, rather than the institution of empiric therapy.) was normal (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Chest radiograph on admission.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest is shown in Figure 3. The same CT image is depicted in Figure 4, with a portion magnified.
Figure 3. CT scan of the chest, high resolution.
Figure 4. CT scan of the chest, with portion magnified.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Sputum was induced and direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) testing for Pneumocystis jirovecii (previously known as Pneumocystis carinii) was positive (Figure 5). The plasma level of (1, 3)-beta-D-glucan ((1, 3)-beta-D-glucan is a component of fungal cell walls, and its presence in serum denotes invasive fungal disease. P. jirovecii is a fungus, albeit a somewhat unusual one that was previously thought to be a protozoan. The presence of an elevated 1,3 -beta-D-glucan level with a normal galactomannan level may help distinguish Pneumocystis infection from invasive aspergillosis, a condition in which both tests are more likely to be elevated.) was greater than 500 pg/ml (reference range: greater than 80 pg/ml is positive).
Figure 5. DFA of an induced sputum specimen.
Treatment and Followup
Steroids, clindamycin and primaquine (A second line therapy that can be used in trimethoprim-sulfa allergy.) were administered. The latter two were initially started because of possible allergies to sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim and dapsone. After further discussion and review of her history, the medications were changed to dapsone and trimethoprim (Most allergies are to the sulfa component.). A hemolytic anemia developed, however, which was thought to be due to dapsone; treatment with clindamycin and primaquine were resumed. A trial of atovaquone was stopped secondary to dysgeusia (A distortion in the sense of taste.).
The hospital course was also complicated by gram-negative bacteremia caused by Enterobacter cloacae, which occurred following placement of a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC). Additional antibiotic therapy directed against this organism was given (initially with cefepime empirically, followed by ceftriaxone and, finally, ciprofloxacin orally). No other source for this infection was documented. A new regimen of antiretroviral therapy, which included lopinavir-ritonavir and emtricitabine-tenofovir, was begun.
At the time of discharge, she had improved: breathing ambient air for approximately one week, able to ambulate up and down the stairs while maintaining an oxygen saturation of 90% or greater, and afebrile for 48 hours. Her cough had nearly resolved and laboratory tests of liver function were normal.
Discussion
Pneumocystis jirovecii, formerly called Pneumocystis carinii, is known to cause pneumonia in immunosuppressed individuals, and was one of the first infections associated with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in the 1980's. It was initially thought to be protozoal; however, genetic analysis has led to its identification as a fungus.
This case illustrates the subacute course that can be seen in patients with HIV infection and AIDS who develop Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP). Also of note is how patients with PCP can have a normal chest radiograph (a finding which occurs in about 10% of HIV-infected patients with PCP). Computed tomography of the chest is more sensitive than the chest radiograph for demonstrating PCP-related findings.
Final Diagnosis
Pneumonia caused by Pneumocystis jirovecii, formerly called Pneumocystis carinii, in a patient with HIV infection and AIDS.
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Pneumocystis pneumonia--Los Angeles. MMWR 1981;30:250-2.
PMID:6265753(PubMed abstract) Walzer PD and Smulian AG. (2005). Chapter 268, Pneumocystis Species in Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Ed., Vol. 2., 3080-3094. Elsevier Churchill Livingtstone.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Pneumocystis pneumonia--Los Angeles. MMWR 1981;30:250-2.
PMID:6265753(PubMed abstract)
Walzer PD and Smulian AG. (2005). Chapter 268, Pneumocystis Species in Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Ed., Vol. 2., 3080-3094. Elsevier Churchill Livingtstone.
