History of Present Illness
IDSA 2005 Case Summary: A man with myelodysplasia and new ulcerating nodules.
A man in his sixties with a history of myelodysplastic syndrome complained of the development of small pruritic pustules on his lower extremities. These pustules progressed to nodular, ulcerating lesions. He received two short courses of oral cefazolin with transient improvement, which was not sustained.
Past Medical History
There was a history of myelodysplasia.
Social History
He was retired and enjoyed sports.
Epidemiological History
He had recently traveled to Spain.
Physical Examination
The vital signs were normal. There were scattered nodular erythematous lesions with superficial ulceration on the lower extremities, as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 15,000 cells/mm³ with 12% blasts.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A skin biopsy was performed (Figures 2 and 3).
Figure 2. Biopsy result.
Figure 3. Biopsy result.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A skin biopsy revealed a neutrophilic infiltrate and granules consistent with basophilic cocci surrounded by an eosinophilic coat, typical of the Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon (Figures 2 and 3). Culture grew Staphylococcus aureus.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was treated for six weeks with anti-staphylococcal antibiotics, and the lesions resolved. He then underwent a bone marrow transplant as treatment for his myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) associated acute myelogenous leukemia (AML).
Discussion
Pyoderma gangrenosum and Sweet's syndrome are non-infectious dermatoses. Thus, the presence of gram positive cocci excludes these diagnoses. Myiasis and Leishmaniasis are associated with epidemiologic exposures that are absent in this case.
Botryomycosis, a chronic suppurative bacterial infection, may present with recurring scattered papular and nodular skin or soft tissue lesions. It often occurs in immunosuppressed patients and is commonly caused by Staphylococcus aureus. Successful treatment requires a prolonged course of antibiotics. The Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon is the characteristic finding on biopsy and superficially resembles a sulfur granule of actinomycosis. Rarely, botryomycosis may present with visceral disease, such as in the lung.
Final Diagnosis
Botryomycosis secondary to Staphylococcus aureus infection.
References
