History of Present Illness
Summary: A man with rapidly progressive (Tempo of onset and resolution are important clues in the diagnosis of infectious diseases. Most 'ordinary' bacterial infections have a time-course over days, consistent with bacterial growth and host immune response. Illnesses which progress much more slowly or more rapidly suggest particular types of organisms. In particular, rapid progression over hours to minutes can suggest toxin-mediated pathophysiology, sometimes induced by bacterial virulence factors.) arm pain and swelling.
A man in his fifties presented to an outside hospital with severe pain in the right upper extremity of a few hours' duration. The physical examination was normal (The pattern of severe pain with normal or minimally changed surface examination is extremely worrisome and suggests underlying tissue destruction. This sign can be a medical and surgical emergency but is frequently missed.) and he was discharged. Over the next few hours, he developed progressive swelling of the right upper extremity, with ecchymoses and bullae (Terminology: Bullae are large, fluid-filled blisters.); he was re-evaluated and transferred to a tertiary-care hospital.
Past Medical History
Non-contributory.
Physical Examination
On examination, the right upper extremity was diffusely swollen with a deep red discoloration; there were several hemorrhagic bullae (The bruising suggests that the pathogen is causing bleeding in the tissues and the bullae suggest a bacterial toxin or enzyme causing layers of the skin to peel apart from one another. Both of these are indications of a very dangerous infection.). No pulses were palpable in the right upper extremity. Figures 1 and 2 show a photograph of the arm and axilla, and a close-up of bullous lesions on the right upper extremity.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Figure 2. Physical finding.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 8,900 cells/mm³ (reference range 4500-11,000) with 47% polymorphonuclear leukocytes and 38% band forms (Terminology: Newly created neutrophils have a band-like nucleus visible under the microscope. The presence of many bands suggest the immune system is making a large number of new white blood cells, indicating severe infection.). A radiograph revealed extensive air in the soft tissues (Only a small number of bacteria that can infect soft tissues produces gas that can be seen on radiographs and occasionally felt on examination. Notably, anaerobic bacteria such as Clostridium are gas-producers.).
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
High-dose penicillin (Though penicillin has a relatively narrow spectrum of activity and many current pathogens are resistant to it, it remains the most potent agent for several important infections. The distinction between the breadth of activity against multiple organisms and potency against specific organisms is an important principle in infectious diseases and underlies the difference between empiric and targeted therapy. The availability of resources, including medications, may also play a significant role in treatment decisions.) was administered intravenously and an emergent right forequarter amputation (Rapid removal of the source of infection can be essential and life-saving in severe soft tissue infection. In some circumstances, it is crucial not to lose time with diagnostic maneuvers or medical therapies if it delays necessary excision of involved tissue. In general, when infections have killed significant amounts of tissue, this tissue must be removed for the infection to be cleared.) was performed.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
An aspirate of one of the bullous lesions revealed gram positive rods. Figure 3 shows a gram stain of the aspirate from a bullous lesion. Figure 4, a tissue gram stain of muscle resected at the time of surgery, reveals many gram-positive rods. Surgical cultures grew Clostridium septicum.
Figure 3. Gram stain of the aspirate.
Figure 4. Tissue gram stain.
Treatment and Followup
In retrospect, the patient also reported a history of bright red blood per rectum of several months' duration, and evaluation revealed an invasive colonic carcinoma (The appearance of an unusual infection should prompt evaluation for possible undiagnosed underlying illness that acted as a predisposing factor. In particular, cryptic gastrointestinal malignancy can increase the risk of several infections, such as this one.).
Discussion
The features of this case that suggest clostridial gas gangrene are the rapidly progressive course and the presence of gas in the tissue.
Group A Streptococcus can cause a fulminant necrotizing fasciitis (Terminology: Fulminant necrotizing fasciitis is a severe, life-threatening infection of the deep soft tissues where infection causes tissue destruction and cell-death.) with bullous lesions, but the organism does not produce gas in the tissues. Vibrio vulnificus generally causes severe infection in individuals with underlying liver disease; this patient had no such history.
Clostridial gas gangrene is generally divided into traumatic gas gangrene (which occurs after surgery or injury) and spontaneous gas gangrene. Traumatic gas gangrene is most often due to C. perfringens, and is sometimes due to C. septicum, C. novyi, C. sordellii and other Clostridium species. In contrast, and as in this case, spontaneous gas gangrene occurs without any apparent preceding trauma. The most common cause is C. septicum. Preexisting lesions include either gastrointestinal diseases (such as colon tumor, intestinal surgery, mucosal ulceration) or systemic illnesses (such as diabetes mellitus, leukemia, neutropenia or cirrhosis). C. septicum infection has been associated with malignancy. In one series of 162 patients with C. septicum infection, 81% had a malignancy and in 37% the cancer was occult. The most common neoplasms were colorectal cancer (as in this case) and hematologic malignancies.
Final Diagnosis
Spontaneous Clostridium septicum gas gangrene, associated with colonic carcinoma.
References
