History of Present Illness
IDSA 2006 Fellows Day Case and Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A man with dyspnea and cough.
A man in his forties presented with a nonproductive cough, dyspnea and decreased oral intake of three months' duration. The symptoms had worsened during the preceding week. There was subjective fever, chills and weight loss of an unspecified amount.
Past Medical History
There was a history of mental illness and a positive tuberculosis skin test (PPD), which had not been treated in the past.
Medications
Medications included haloperidol, valproic acid and olanzapine.
Epidemiological History
He was born in Haiti and immigrated to the northeastern United States more than two decades before. He lived in an urban area and had not traveled recently. While in Haiti, he had owned a cat; he had no pets in the United States. He smoked marijuana, but denied intravenous drug use. He denied any sexual contacts; however, witnesses had seen him in the presence of sex workers.
Physical Examination
On examination, he was an ill-appearing, lethargic male with mild tachypnea. The temperature was 39.1°C (102.4°F), respirations 24 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation 98% on ambient air. The lungs revealed slight crackles anteriorly. The mucous membranes were dry. There were no oral lesions or lymphadenopathy. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 6,600 cells/mm³. Arterial blood gases revealed a partial pressure of oxygen of 69 mm Hg on ambient air; the alveolar and arterial oxygen gradient was 44 mm Hg. The level of lactate dehydrogenase was 2,706 IU/L (elevated).
A chest radiograph from three years earlier is shown in Figure 1, and one from this admission in Figure 2. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph, three years before admission.
Figure 2. Chest radiograph on admission.
Figure 3. CT scan of the chest on admission.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Testing for antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was positive (ELISA) and confirmed by Western Blot analysis. The CD4 T-lymphocyte count was 10 cells/mm³, CD4 percentage 1%, and the HIV-RNA level was >750,000 copies/ml. A bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsy of right middle lobe was performed. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the biopsy specimen is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4. H and E stain of lung biopsy.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The biopsy specimen revealed Toxoplasma. The arrows in Figures 5 and 6 indicate the location of encysted forms of the organism.
Figure 5. H and E stain of lung biopsy.
Figure 6. Immunohistochemical stain of biopsy.
Treatment and Followup
Initial therapy on admission included sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim and prednisone (due to a concern for Pneumocystis) and azithromycin (for possible atypical bacterial pneumonia). However, on this regimen, the patient remained tachypneic, tachycardic, and became increasingly hypoxic. Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine were administered when the pathological examination of tissue obtained via bronchoscopy revealed Toxoplasma encysted forms. Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim and azithromycin were discontinued, and prednisone was tapered. His respiratory status improved significantly with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine therapy. Repeat chest radiographs showed resolution of the pulmonary infiltrates.
The patient then began to spike fevers. Sulfadiazine was discontinued, and clindamycin begun, due to the possibility of sulfa-related drug fevers; the patient improved and defervesced. Clindamycin and pyramethamine (with leucovorin) were administered.
The fundoscopic exam was normal. Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed scattered cerebral calcifications. There was no other evidence suggestive of extrapulmonary toxoplasmosis.
Discussion
Most cases of Toxoplasma pneumonitis in patients with HIV infection and AIDS are related to reactivation of latent Toxoplasma gondii infection. The most common symptoms are nonproductive cough and dyspnea. Definitive diagnosis requires either histological demonstration of the organism or isolation by culture. Direct visualization with Giemsa or hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining may show crescent-shaped tachyzoites. Stains may show encysted forms, as in this case. Standard therapy at the time of this publication is pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine.
Final Diagnosis
Toxoplasma pneumonitis caused by Toxoplasma gondii in a patient with HIV infection and AIDS.
References
