History of Present Illness
2007 November Featured Case Summary: A woman with headache and periorbital swelling on the right side.
A woman in her thirties was well until eleven days earlier, when dizziness and headache over the temporal region on the right developed. The pain improved transiently, but headaches in the right temporal region recurred, and were worse with noise. Three days before admission, the severity of the pain increased significantly, and the next day, emesis and pleuritic chest pain on the left side occurred. Later that day, she called her primary care provider and then went to the emergency department of another hospital in the evening. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, performed according to a pulmonary embolus protocol, revealed two pulmonary nodules on the right and a left lower lobe abnormality that was thought to be consistent with either an inflammatory process or infarct. The D-dimer level in the serum was elevated at 1029 ng/ml (reference range <500 ng/ml).
While in the emergency department, the patient noted that both eyes felt “weird”, but there was no diplopia or changes in vision. Prochlorperazine and diphenhydramine were administered, and the symptoms partially improved. She was discharged home on azithromycin.
Early the next morning, she awoke with nausea and vomiting. Later that day, she saw her primary care provider; trimethobenzamide and intravenous fluids were administered, and she returned home. That evening, bilateral eye pain developed and during the next 3 hours, periorbital swelling and proptosis of the right eye occurred. She returned to the emergency department. Five hours after the onset of eye pain, diplopia was noted. The patient was transferred to a tertiary care hospital for further evaluation.
Past Medical History
There was a history of temporomandibular joint disorder.
Medications
Medications included oral contraceptive pills.
Allergies
There were no allergies to medications; amoxicillin had caused vomiting.
Social History
She lived with her husband, two young children and two dogs.
Epidemiological History
Both of her children had recently had staphylococcal skin infections. She had traveled recently to Northern New England with her family, and reported no trauma, tick exposure, or insect bites. She did not smoke, drink alcohol, or use illicit drugs.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared uncomfortable, lying in bed with her eyes closed. She was easily roused, was oriented, and answered questions appropriately. The temperature was 101.9°F (38.8°C), the pulse 100 beats per minute, blood pressure 133/66 mm Hg, respirations 18 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 96% while breathing ambient air. Pupils were 4.5 millimeters in diameter bilaterally, and decreased to 3 mm with illumination. There was mild facial swelling of the right cheek, mild periorbital edema, and erythema and 3-4 millimeters proptosis of the right eye when compared to the left eye. Chemosis and ptosis were present on the right. Extraocular movements of the left eye were normal; the right eye had limited medial adduction, and no lateral, superior or inferior motion. (See Figures 1 and 2 .) There was mild tenderness periorbitally on the right, and a small crusted papule on forehead between the eyebrows. The fundoscopic examination and tympanic membranes were normal. There was neck stiffness, and no cervical lymphadenopathy. The remainder of the physical examination was normal.
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Figure 2. Physical findings.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 18,600 per cubic millimeter (93% neutrophils, 3% lymphocytes, 4% monocytes), hematocrit 33.6%, and platelets 216,000 per cubic millimeter. Laboratory test results of serum chemistries and liver function were normal. A pregnancy test was negative.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) obtained by lumbar puncture revealed a glucose level of 69 mg/dL and protein of 180 mg/dL. Tube #1 had 1575 red cells per cubic millimeter, 1130 white cells per cubic millimeter (83% neutrophils, 17% monocytes); Tube #4 had 195 red cells per cubic millimeter and 3000 white cells per cubic millimeter (82% neutrophils, 18% lymphocytes). A gram stain of a cytospin of the CSF revealed abundant polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and no organisms. (See Figure 3 ).
Figure 3. Gram stain of CSF.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was suggestive of thromboses, and also showed evidence of dural enhancement suggestive of meningitis ( Figures 4 and 5 ). CT angiography of the head revealed thrombosis of both cavernous sinuses, both superior ophthalmic veins (complete on the right, partial on the left), the dorsal clival venous plexus, right sigmoid sinus, right internal jugular vein, and likely bilateral sphenoparietal sinuses. Cultures of the blood and CSF from the day of admission grew methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) ( Figure 6 ).
Figure 4. MRI scan of the head.
Figure 5. MRI scan with dural enhancement.
Figure 6. Gram stain of aerobic blood culture.
Treatment and Followup
Vancomycin, ceftriaxone and metronidazole were started empirically, and the patient was anticoagulated. When the culture results were known, the antibiotics were changed to nafcillin and rifampin and continued for four weeks.
During the admission, right-sided facial pain persisted, moving to the lateral jaw and neck on the right side, and was associated with trismus. CT scanning of the neck showed some soft tissue swelling but no evidence of abscess. CT of the chest showed a left upper lobe cavitary lesion as well as small other scattered lesions, consistent with septic pulmonary emboli. Transthoracic echocardiography showed no evidence of vegetations.
The fevers resolved and she had slow but significant improvement in ptosis, proptosis and eye movement. Approximately three months after completing treatment, her symptoms had improved markedly, and were resolved except for intermittent headaches at approximately nine months. Ten months after admission, CT angiography revealed non-significant opacification in the bilateral cavernous sinuses with normal caliber superior ophthalmic veins bilaterally, and stable persistent thrombosis of the right sigmoid sinus, jugular sinus and internal jugular veins. The ophthalmic veins were normal in caliber and the transverse sinus enhanced normally. She remained anticoagulated on coumadin pending further evaluation to rule out coagulopathies.
Discussion
Cavernous sinus thrombosis is a relatively rare disease. The facial veins and pterygoid plexus via the inferior and superior ophthalmic veins drain into the cavernous sinus and therefore infections on the face, especially from nose and eyes as well as sphenoid and ethmoid sinus infections can lead to cavernous sinus thrombosis. Dental infectious, otitis media and mastoiditis can rarely lead to this complication as well. This patient may have had a pustule on her forehead that was infected with Staphylococcus aureus, which she squeezed or drained prior to the initial onset of symptoms.
Patients with cavernous sinus thrombosis typically present with headache, usually unilateral in a frontal or retro-orbital distribution. They subsequently may develop unilateral eye swelling or proptosis, which may become bilateral in 1-2 days as the cavernous thrombosis spreads to contralateral side. Other symptoms include diplopia (due to ophthalmoplegia), ptosis and photophobia. Some patients will develop altered mental status with confusion and obtundation. Physical findings correlate with the anatomic location of the cavernous sinus, which encompasses the third and fourth cranial nerves as well as the 1st two branches of the fifth cranial nerve.
Staphylococcus aureus accounts for up to 70% of infectious that cause cavernous sinus thrombosis; other potential pathogens include Streptococcus pneumoniae , and rarely gram-negatives, anaerobes or fungi.
Treatment is with antibiotics directed at the causative organism, as well as surgical drainage of abscess if present. The role of anticoagulation is controversial, and the decision to treat should be individualized.
Final Diagnosis
Multiple septic venous thromboses (including bilateral cavernous sinus thrombosis, ophthalmic vein thrombosis, right sigmoid sinus, right internal jugular thrombosis and bilateral pulmonary septic emboli), bacteremia and meningitis caused by methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus .
References
Bhatia, K., and Jones, N.S. (2002). Septic cavernous sinus thrombosis secondary to sinusitis: are anticoagulants indicated? A review of the literature. J Laryngol Otol 116, 667-676.
PMID:12437798 ( PubMed abstract )
Ebright, J.R., Pace, M.T., and Niazi, A.F. (2001). Septic thrombosis of the cavernous sinuses. Arch Intern Med 161, 2671-2676.
PMID:11732931 ( PubMed abstract )
Pavlovich, P., Looi, A., and Rootman, J. (2006). Septic thrombosis of the cavernous sinus: two different mechanisms. Orbit 25, 39-43.
PMID:16527775 ( PubMed abstract )
