History of Present Illness
2012 IDWeek Case Presentation: An elderly woman with fever, pleuritic pain, and left hip and leg pain after travel to India.
An Indian woman in her seventies, with a history of rheumatoid arthritis, was admitted because of fever, pleuritic pain, and left hip and leg pain after travel to India two months before.
Approximately 10 days before admission, sudden sharp pleuritic pain developed in the right upper quadrant, as well as severe left hip and thigh pain. Fevers to 103°F (39.4°C) occurred, associated with rigors and night sweats. Her daughter gave her homeopathic medications (including eucalyptus, an adrenal supplement derived from either animal or plants, echinacea and omatium) for a presumed urinary tract infection, without improvement. The patient became nearly immobile from pain, with altered mental status. Her daughter called emergency medical services, and she was brought to the hospital.
The patient also reported diarrhea of 2 days' duration and had been noted to drink an increased amount of water over this time period.
In the Emergency Department, intravenous normal saline, acetaminophen, vancomycin (1 g IV), levofloxacin (750 mg IV), and hydrocortisone (100 mg IV) were administered. She was admitted to the medical intensive care unit for 3 days, with improvement, and was transferred to the floor. Blood cultures grew oxacillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. Urine culture grew E. coli and urinary tract infection was diagnosed. Her joint pains, myalgias, and immobility were attributed to uncontrolled rheumatoid arthritis.
Four days after admission, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis revealed a rim-enhancing fluid collection along the distal left iliopsoas muscle thought to be consistent with a left psoas abscess, and prominent soft tissue enhancement involving and surrounding the left hip joint, avascular necrosis of the hip and a right loculated pleural effusion. The same day, after resolution of her acute infectious symptoms, prednisone (20 mg orally, daily) was begun. Thrombocytopenia developed and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia was subsequently diagnosed; subcutaneous heparin (given for prophylaxis against deep venous thrombosis) was stopped 8 days after admission. Diarrhea worsened. An abdominal radiograph performed 8 days after admission was normal, with gas seen in the rectum and no evidence of small bowel obstruction. Some calcifications, thought to be phleboliths, were seen in the right pelvis.
Twelve days after admission, anticoagulation was started with fondiparinux and warfarin. After administration of anticoagulation, diarrhea became frankly bloody. Stool specimens were obtained for Clostridium difficile PCR, ova and parasite screening, and cultures. Repeat abdominal radiography 13 days after admission showed dilated loops of bowel, particularly the colon. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen (Figure 1) revealed dilation of the cecum (8.3 cm), ascending colon (5.6 cm), and transverse colon (4.4 cm) with extensive wall thickening and pericolonic stranding and intraluminal air-fluid levels. No free air or pneumotosis coli was seen.
Surgery consultation was obtained, and she was taken to the operating room the same day for exploratory laparotomy, total abdominal colectomy, and end ileostomy. Intraoperative findings were notable for perforated colon and extensive intraperitoneal stool spillage. She was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit for recovery, and infectious disease consultation was obtained.
Figure 1. CT of the abdomen.
Past Medical History
She had been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis 7 years before admission, and was treated with methotrexate for four years, until recurrent multidrug-resistant Escherichia coli urinary tract infections and sepsis developed. Methotrexate was stopped two years before this presentation. Since then, her rheumatologic symptoms had worsened, and she had recurrent fever attributed to rheumatoid arthritis and her recurrent urinary tract infections.
She also had hypertension, gastro-esophageal reflux disease, a history of herpes zoster and mild dementia.
Medications
She had previously received methotrexate, which she stopped approximately 2 years before this presentation. Medications during admission included metronidazole, micafungin, esomeprazole, metoprolol and prednisone (which was stopped a few days before surgery).
Allergies
She had multiple allergies including penicillin (anaphylaxis), imipenem (anaphylaxis), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (itching), ciprofloxacin (unknown reaction), nitrofurantoin (itching).
Social History
She was a homemaker.
Epidemiological History
The patient was born in rural India and resided there until moving to the United States 4 years before admission. Since that time she had spent 6 months per year in each country. She had returned from her most recent trip to India approximately 2 months before admission. While in India, she had several episodes of fever and weakness that lasted for days to weeks. When she returned to the United States, she initially felt better and was more mobile. She did not drink alcohol, smoke, or use drugs. She denied any animal exposures.
Physical Examination
The patient’s temperature was 97.7°F (36.5°C), pulse 110 beats per minutes, blood pressure 134/50 mm Hg, and respirations 20 breaths per minute. She was somnolent but could be aroused to answer questions. Breath sounds were coarse diffusely. There was a large abdominal midline incision covered with a clean bandage and a right-sided ileostomy with pink, healthy-appearing mucosa and brown stool in the ileostomy bag. There was 2+ bilateral pitting lower extremity edema to the knees. Neurological examination revealed global weakness without focal findings. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 23,700 per cubic millimeter (reference range 4500-11,000), hemoglobin was 12.7 g/dL (reference range 12.0-16.0 g/dL), hematocrit 37.4% (reference range 36.0-46.0%), and platelets 51,000 per cubic millimeter (reference range 150,000-440,000). Sodium was 132 mmol/L (reference range 135-145) and potassium was 2.9 mmol/L (reference range 3.5-5.0). Other routine laboratory tests were normal. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) antibody was positive. Cultures of the blood were sterile. Urine culture grew Candida glabrata. Stool examinations for ova and parasites and for Clostridium difficile were negative. Three separate sputum cultures were negative for acid-fast bacilli and her tuberculin skin test was nonreactive.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
On gross examination, the excised tissue included a segment of terminal ileum (4.5 cm x 2.0 cm) contiguous with a segment of colon (73 cm x 8 cm). There were multiple areas along the serosa and mesenteric surface covered with tan-yellow creamy material and several areas with red/brown adhesions. There were three internal areas of ulceration. The first involved the ileocecal valve extending to the cecal mucosa (7.5 x 5.0 cm), the second was 9.0 cm distal to the first and measured 7.0 x 3.5 cm, and the third was 9 cm distal to the second and measured over 30 cm in length by up to 5 cm. All areas were characterized by tan/brown to yellow, slightly ulcerated, partially liquefied tissue. The edges were hyperemic and slightly raised. Surgical margins were viable. Micropathological examination of the excised tissue is shown in Figures 2 and 3.
Figure 2. Resected colon, hematolylin and eosin stain, low power.
Figure 3. Resected colon, H and E stain, high power.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Microscopic examination of the right hemicolectomy specimen revealed three confluent areas of colonic ulceration (Figure 2) associated with organisms consistent with Entamoeba histolytica (Figure 3). Findings included focal vasculitis of medium sized artery within pericolonic adipose tissue and serosal adhesions. Twelve lymph nodes were examined and nodal fibrosis was present. There were no granulomas, viral cytopathic effect, or dysplasia identified.
Treatment and Followup
The patient’s amebic infection was treated with metronidazole for a 10-day course, followed by paromomycin for 7 days, and vancomycin was continued for treatment of her staphylococcal infection. Serological testing for E. histolytica was positive.
Recovery was complicated by the formation of intra-abdominal abscesses, which were drained and grew E. coli resistant to all antibiotics except carbapenems. She was desensitized to doripenem and this drug was added to her regimen. Two weeks later, the abscesses were re-cultured and the E. coli was found to be resistant to all drugs except for tigecycline. Vancomycin was discontinued and tigecycline was added to her regimen. Her hospital course was further complicated by Candida glabrata urinary tract infection, persistent intra-abdominal abscesses, adrenal insufficiency, healthcare-associated pneumonia (treated with a 10-day course of vancomycin) and Burkholderia cepacia line sepsis (requiring addition of ceftazidime to her antibiotic regimen). Four months after admission, she suffered a cardiac arrest and expired.
Discussion
Diarrhea is a common problem in hospitalized patients and has a broad differential. This patient presented with non-bloody diarrhea that worsened during her hospitalization and became bloody after initiation of anticoagulation. Because she was on anticoagulants, it was difficult to determine if her diarrhea should be classified as dysentery. The differential diagnosis for infectious dysentery, particularly in an immigrant, includes Salmonella, Shigella, Escherichia coli (enteroinvasive and enterohemorrhagic forms), and Campylobacter. With the exception of Salmonella, most bacterial causes of dysentery can be eliminated because of their short incubation period. This patient had returned to the United States 6 months prior to hospitalization and had been in the hospital for almost 2 weeks, so infection with one of these pathogens was unlikely. Salmonella can chronically colonize the gall bladders of some patients, but recrudescence with this severity is uncommon. Findings were not consistent with tuberculosis (TB) on biopsy, and the patient had no other findings concerning for TB.
Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) was initially considered the most likely (though ultimately incorrect) diagnosis in this case, presuming that her bloody stools were caused by anticoagulants rather than the disease process itself. The patient was an elderly woman who had been on antibiotics for almost 2 weeks, so her risk of C. difficile colitis was relatively high. In fact, despite several negative tests for C. difficile in the stool, she had started treatment with metronidazole for presumed CDI. Ultimately the diagnosis of E. histolytica was made on biopsy, with later confirmation by positive serology.
Entamoeba histolytica is a single-celled protozoan parasite that can cause a range of clinical disease from asymptomatic infection to severe colitis or liver abscesses. Infection occurs when humans ingest the quadrinucleate cyst form, which releases trophozoites in the intestinal lumen (Haque 2003, CDC life cycle). These forms attach to mucins on the colon wall and can colonize the colon with minimal symptoms, or they can invade through the intestinal epithelium to cause colitis or spread to other parts of the body. E. histolytica is the third most common parasitic infection in the United States, with an incidence of 1.2/100,000 persons per year; the most frequently affected populations are travelers, immigrants, and institutionalized individuals.
The majority of infections are asymptomatic, but should still be treated to prevent later development of invasive disease and to decrease transmission of the parasite. Diarrhea is the most common presentation of clinical disease due to E. histolytica, with dysentery occurring in 15-33% of these cases (Mandell, Haque 2006, Haque 2009). Acute necrotizing colitis and toxic megacolon are both rare, occurring in about 0.5% of cases (Haque 2003, Ellyson 1986). Severe or fatal colitis and hepatic abscess due to E. histolytica associated with steroid use have been reported (Kobayashi 2011, Stuiver 1978), and steroids may increase the risk of toxic megacolon due to the pathogen (Haque 2003). Amebic colitis can acutely worsen if steroids or other immunosuppressive medications are given to a patient who is mistakenly thought to have inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Alternatively, in a patient with IBD who receives steroids, E. histolytica infection may worsen (Lysy 1991, Patel 1989, Mendonca 1977). Hepatic abscess is the most common extraintestinal manifestation of E. histolytica infection and usually occurs in adult men and affects the right lobe of the liver. Hepatic abscesses can extend into the thoracic cavity, but hematogenous dissemination is quite rare.
Diagnosis is usually made by identification of the organisms in stools samples in developing countries, but these tests are insensitive (10-60%) and cannot distinguish E. histolytica f rom nonpathogenic E. dispar and E. moshkovskii (Haque 2003). Stool antigen and PCR methods are more sensitive though not as widely available. Serological tests for antibodies to E. histolytica are 70-90% sensitive in symptomatic patients but can remain positive for years after infection (Haque 2003). Biopsy findings are variable; a flask-shaped ulcer is classic.
Many patients are asymptomatic but should still be treated to prevent later development of invasive disease. Isolated intestinal disease can be treated with paromomycin. Invasive infections such as hepatic abscess should be treated with metronidazole followed by a course of paromomycin because metronidazole does not reliably eliminate amoebas from the intestinal lumen. Percutaneous drainage is indicated for some hepatic abscesses. In cases of severe colitis, surgery is indicated for perforated bowel or toxic megacolon.
Final Diagnosis
Toxic megacolon due to Entamoeba histolytica in a patient with rheumatoid arthritis.
References
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), http://dpd.cdc.gov/dpdx/HTML/Amebiasis.htm, accessed May 10, 2012. Ellyson, J.H., Bezmalinovic, Z., Parks, S.N., and Lewis, F.R., Jr. (1986). Necrotizing amebic colitis: a frequently fatal complication. Am J Surg 152, 21-26.
PMID:3728812(PubMed abstract) Haque R, Mondal D, Duggal P, Kabir M, Roy S, Farr BM, Sack RB, Petri WA Jr. Entabmoeba histolytica infection in children and protection from subsequent amebiasis. Infect Immun (2006) 74:904-909.
PMID:16428733(PubMed abstract) Haque, R., Huston, C.D., Hughes, M., Houpt, E., and Petri, W.A., Jr. (2003). Amebiasis. N Engl J Med 348, 1565-1573.
PMID:12700377(PubMed abstract) Haque, R., Mondal, D., Karim, A., Molla, I.H., Rahim, A., Faruque, A.S., Ahmad, N., Kirkpatrick, B.D., Houpt, E., Snider, C., and Petri, W.A., Jr. (2009). Prospective case-control study of the association between common enteric protozoal parasites and diarrhea in Bangladesh. Clin Infect Dis 48, 1191-1197.
PMID:19323634(PubMed abstract) Kobayashi, C.I., Yamamoto, G., Hayashi, A., Ota, S., Imai, Y., Fukayama, M., and Kurokawa, M. (2011). Fatal amebic colitis after high-dose dexamethasone therapy for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. Ann Hematol 90, 225-226.
PMID:20467744(PubMed abstract) Lysy, J., Zimmerman, J., Sherman, Y., Feigin, R., and Ligumsky, M. (1991). Crohn's colitis complicated by superimposed invasive amebic colitis. Am J Gastroenterol 86, 1063-1065.
PMID:1858742(PubMed abstract) Mendonca, H.L., Jr., Vieta, J.O., and Korelitz, B.I. (1977). Perforation of the colon in unsuspected amebic colitis: report of two cases. Dis Colon Rectum 20, 149-153.
PMID:191233(PubMed abstract) Patel, A.S., and DeRidder, P.H. (1989). Amebic colitis masquerading as acute inflammatory bowel disease: the role of serology in its diagnosis. J Clin Gastroenterol 11, 407-410.
PMID:2547865(PubMed abstract) Petri WA Jr, Haque R. Chapter 273: Entamoeba species, including amebiasis. Mandell, G.L., Bennett, J.E., and Dolin, R. (2010). Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles and practice of infectious diseases, 7th edn (Philadelphia, PA, Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier) Stuiver, P.C., and Goud, T.J. (1978). Corticosteroids and liver amoebiasis. Br Med J 2, 394-395.
PMID:687936(PubMed abstract)
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), http://dpd.cdc.gov/dpdx/HTML/Amebiasis.htm, accessed May 10, 2012.
Ellyson, J.H., Bezmalinovic, Z., Parks, S.N., and Lewis, F.R., Jr. (1986). Necrotizing amebic colitis: a frequently fatal complication. Am J Surg 152, 21-26.
PMID:3728812(PubMed abstract)
Haque R, Mondal D, Duggal P, Kabir M, Roy S, Farr BM, Sack RB, Petri WA Jr. Entabmoeba histolytica infection in children and protection from subsequent amebiasis. Infect Immun (2006) 74:904-909.
PMID:16428733(PubMed abstract)
Haque, R., Huston, C.D., Hughes, M., Houpt, E., and Petri, W.A., Jr. (2003). Amebiasis. N Engl J Med 348, 1565-1573.
PMID:12700377(PubMed abstract)
Haque, R., Mondal, D., Karim, A., Molla, I.H., Rahim, A., Faruque, A.S., Ahmad, N., Kirkpatrick, B.D., Houpt, E., Snider, C., and Petri, W.A., Jr. (2009). Prospective case-control study of the association between common enteric protozoal parasites and diarrhea in Bangladesh. Clin Infect Dis 48, 1191-1197.
PMID:19323634(PubMed abstract)
Kobayashi, C.I., Yamamoto, G., Hayashi, A., Ota, S., Imai, Y., Fukayama, M., and Kurokawa, M. (2011). Fatal amebic colitis after high-dose dexamethasone therapy for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. Ann Hematol 90, 225-226.
PMID:20467744(PubMed abstract)
Lysy, J., Zimmerman, J., Sherman, Y., Feigin, R., and Ligumsky, M. (1991). Crohn's colitis complicated by superimposed invasive amebic colitis. Am J Gastroenterol 86, 1063-1065.
PMID:1858742(PubMed abstract)
Mendonca, H.L., Jr., Vieta, J.O., and Korelitz, B.I. (1977). Perforation of the colon in unsuspected amebic colitis: report of two cases. Dis Colon Rectum 20, 149-153.
PMID:191233(PubMed abstract)
Patel, A.S., and DeRidder, P.H. (1989). Amebic colitis masquerading as acute inflammatory bowel disease: the role of serology in its diagnosis. J Clin Gastroenterol 11, 407-410.
PMID:2547865(PubMed abstract)
Petri WA Jr, Haque R. Chapter 273: Entamoeba species, including amebiasis. Mandell, G.L., Bennett, J.E., and Dolin, R. (2010). Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's principles and practice of infectious diseases, 7th edn (Philadelphia, PA, Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier)
Stuiver, P.C., and Goud, T.J. (1978). Corticosteroids and liver amoebiasis. Br Med J 2, 394-395.
PMID:687936(PubMed abstract)
