History of Present Illness
IDSA 2002 Case Summary: A middle-aged man with a low-grade fever and cough.
A man in his fifties with a significant smoking history presented to the emergency department with symptoms of low-grade fever and non-productive cough. A chest radiograph revealed a left lung nodular lesion near the pleura, with no infiltrate. He was subsequently referred for computed tomoraphy (CT) scan of the chest and further evaluation.
Past Medical History
He had a history of alcohol abuse.
Medications
None.
Epidemiological History
The patient lived in a rural area of Arkansas. He had several pets including a skunk, a python, and several dogs. His pets did not receive regular veterinary care. He had smoked 2-3 packs of cigarettes per day for decades, and reportedly drank several beers per day. He denied recent travel.
Physical Examination
He was a thin, white male who appeared older than his stated age. The temperature was 98.7°F (37.1°C), blood pressure 158/85 mm Hg, pulse 62 beats per minute, and respirations 16 breaths per minute. The lungs were clear, and the remainder of the physical examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) and differential were normal, as were the results of other laboratory tests.
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a left lung nodule (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Chest CT scan.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A thoracotomy with resection of the lung nodule was performed. The pathology results are shown (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Pathology of resected lung nodule.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Pathological examination of the lung tissue revealed a rounded area of coagulative necrosis bordered by a layer of granulomatous inflammation. In the center of the lesion, there was a parasite measuring 200 microns in diameter possessing a thick cuticle (Figure 2). The findings were consistent with a microfilaria of Dirofilaria immitis (dog heartworm).
Treatment and Followup
The patient recovered quickly post-operatively and was discharged home without further treatment, to follow-up with his primary care provider.
Discussion
Dirofilaria immitis (dog heartworm) is transmitted by the mosquito. Its most common host is the dog; humans are dead-end hosts. The parasites develop in the subcutaneous tissues and migrate to the right side of the heart and pulmonary vessels. In humans, the immature filariae die, causing a local vasculitis and pulmonary infarction. May present with cough, chest pain or hemoptysis. Most patients are asymptomatic with a “coin” lesion discovered incidentally.
Final Diagnosis
Dirofilaria immitis pulmonary nodule.
References
Theis, J.H. (2005). Public health aspects of dirofilariasis in the United States. Vet Parasitol 133, 157-180.
PMID:16039780(PubMed abstract)
