History of Present Illness
2008 October Featured Case Summary: A woman with migraine developed increasing headache, blurred vision and nausea.
A woman in her twenties was well until one week earlier, when a persistent headache developed. The headache pain was similar to, but more intense than, her usual migraine, and associated with blurred vision, nausea, and photophobia. Three days before presentation, her family noted her speech was not clear, and she sounded “confused”. A transient episode of numbness on the dorsum of her right foot developed, and resolved spontaneously 2 hours later. She presented to the Emergency Department of a local hospital, where computed tomography (CT) of the head was reportedly normal. Butalbitol-acetaminophen-caffeine, and prochlorperazine were prescribed, and she was discharged home.
The following day, the pain persisted, and an episode of vomiting occurred. She felt subjectively febrile; however, her temperature was not measured. She returned to the Emergency Department; a lumbar puncture was discussed, which she declined, and she returned home.
Two days later, episodes of vomiting recurred. Family members noted she had increasing difficulty with word-finding and naming. She returned to the hospital, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) reportedly demonstrated a lesion in the left fronto-parietal lobe (approximately 2 cm in diameter) with ring enhancement and surrounding edema. Dexamethasone (10 mg) was administered intravenously, and she was transferred to a tertiary care hospital for further care.
At the 2nd hospital, she reported mild nasal congestion but no recent sinus pain, earache, tooth pain, dyspnea, anorexia, or back pain. Approximately one month earlier, she had had her lip pierced; she had no recent dental cleanings or procedures.
Past Medical History
She had had migraines since adolescence (1-2 episodes per month), and a history of sinusitis.
Medications
Medications on transfer included dexamethasone.
Allergies
She had no allergies, but had felt itchy after recent gadolinium administration.
Social History
She lived with a relative.
Epidemiological History
She worked in a healthcare setting. She smoked cigarettes, and did not drink alcohol or use illicit drugs. There was no history of exposure to tuberculosis.
Physical Examination
On examination, she was somnolent but arousable. The temperature was 102.1°F (38.9°C), blood pressure 90/50 mm Hg, pulse 80 beats per minute, respirations 20 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 98% while breathing ambient air. The right tympanic membrane was perforated, with no evidence of infection on either side and no sinus or mastoid tenderness. There was no gingival or dental tenderness. She was oriented to person, place, and year, and appropriately interactive. Her affect was normal, and there were multiple non-fluent paraphasic errors. Naming was poor, with very poor repetition and reading. She was able to comprehend normally and followed all commands. Cranial nerves 2 -12 were intact; 1 was not tested. Mild updrift of the right arm was noted, with minimal pronation. The tongue and lip were pierced. The remainder of the examination was normal, with clear lungs, and no rash, petechiae, or murmurs.
Studies
The hematocrit measured 35.4%, and white blood cell count of 15,200 cells per cubic millimeter (95% leukocytes, 4% lymphocytes and 1% monocytes). A portable chest radiograph was normal.
Lumbar puncture was performed, and specimens of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood were cultured. There were 49 and 47 white cells in tubes 1 and 4, respectively, and 4 and 3 red cells per cubic millimeter in Tubes 1 and 4, respectively. The white cell differential included 53% leukocytes, 31% lymphocytes, and 16% monocytes. The level of glucose in the CSF was 89 mg/dl, and the total protein was 45 mg/dl. A gram stain of the CSF revealed few white cells and mononuclear cells, and no organisms (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Gram stain of CSF cytospin.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Neurology and neurosurgery consultations were obtained, and ceftriaxone, metronidazole and vancomycin administered empirically, as well as phenytoin.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was repeated, and demonstrated a T2/FLAIR heterogeneous lesion (4.2 cm maximally) within the left posterior and inferior frontal lobe, with large Sylvian vessels directly adjacent to the lesion both anteriorly and inferiorly, and extensive T2 hyperintensity surrounding this lesion (representing vasogenic edema), and evidence of a mass effect with a midline shift (Figures 2 and 3). Low-lying cerebellar tonsils and a prominent right cerebellar hemisphere dural venous anomaly were also seen.
Figure 2. MRI of the brain, T2 axial FLAIR.
Figure 3. MRI of the brain, T1 FLAIR post contrast.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody was negative, and subsequently, test results for Toxoplasma gondii DNA in the CSF (by polymerase chain reaction) also were negative.
Neurosurgical drainage of a brain abscess was performed, and 11 cc of purulent material aspirated. A gram stain of the aspirate, shown in Figure 4, demonstrated abundant gram-positive cocci (GPC) in pairs and short chains, and few GPC in clusters, and abundant short gram-positive rods. Culture of the aspirate grew abundant alpha-hemolytic Streptococcus anginosus (milleri group) and, in the anaerobic culture, few colonies of Peptostreptococcus species.
Cardiac echocardiography demonstrated evidence of left-to-right shunting by color Doppler, and a right-to-left shunt by agitated saline contrast study at rest (moderate to large amount of bubbles, 1 beat after appearance of contrast in the right heart), consistent with a patent foramen ovale. The day after her surgical procedure, CT of the lung demonstrated septal thickening, bronchiolar mucoid impaction, and peribronchial opacities in the right lower lobe, consistent with bronchopneumonia, with a small right-sided pleural effusion.
Figure 4. Gram stain of abscess aspirate.
Treatment and Followup
After the culture results and sensitivities of the brain aspirate were known, ceftriaxone was stopped and penicillin G started. Eight days after the first procedure, and after studies indicated an increase in the size of the abscess, an additional 11 cc of purulent material was aspirated. Follow-up chest radiographs were clear, and she was discharged on the 16th day to a rehabilitation facility on antibiotics.
Recovery was complicated by increased headache and fever, and she was readmitted to the hospital. Cultures of the blood were sterile, and brain imaging revealed the abscess had decreased in size. Dental radiographs revealed an abscessed tooth (#30, 1st right mandibular molar) and, while still on antibiotics, a root canal was performed. Rash and hepatitis developed, which were thought to be related to one or more of her medications. Consequently, the medications were changed to levetiracetam, linezolid, metronidazole and dexamethasone; levofloxacin was added because of evidence of recurrent pneumonia on chest radiographs.
Four months after her initial admission, while on metronidazole and levofloxacin and after she agreed to remove the tongue piercing, the patent foramen ovale was repaired with an occlusion device. An MRI scan performed one year later is shown in Figure 5. Fourteen months after the onset of her illness, she was doing well, with some residual foot pain and occasional mild speech delays.
Figure 5. MRI of the brain, 1 year later.
Discussion
Brain abscess, a focal intracerebral infection, begins as a discrete area of cerebritis, which expands and develops central necrosis and a surrounding capsule that is well-vascularized and ring-enhancing (Mathisen GE and Johnson JP 1997; Tunkel 2004). The microbial source of brain abscesses may be from infected sites within the cranium by indirect or direct extension (the most common etiology), by hematogenous spread from distant sites, by disruption of the integrity of the central nervous system from penetrating trauma or neurosurgery, or from a “cryptic” or unknown source. Men appear to be affected more often than women (Mathisen GE and Johnson JP 1997; Carpenter J, Stapleton S, and Holliman R. 2007).
Brain abscess may develop by direct extension from infection of the sinuses, teeth or inner ear. Lesions from the inner ear are more likely to cause abscesses in the temporal lobe or cerebellum; infections in the sinuses, the frontal or temporal lobes; and those from the teeth are more likely to affect the frontal lobe (Tunkel, 2004). Infections from the sinuses occur with greater frequency in patients 10-30 years of age, and extension from the middle ear are the primary causes of brain abscesses in patients less than 20 years or older than 40 years (Tunkel 2004); of note, the latter are on the decline with the advent of more aggressive antibacterial treatment of chronic otitis media (Mathisen and Johnson 1997). Bacterial infections are the most common cause of brain abscess, and Streptococcus species are the most common organism (with milleri group the most frequent sub-species), although staphylococcal infections are seen most often in neurosurgical patients (Carpenter J, Stapleton S, and Holliman R. 2007).
Brain abscess may also develop after hematogenous spread of organisms from another site of infection, such as pyogenic lung infection, endocarditis or intraabdominal infection. (Tunkel 2004). Cyanotic congenital heart disease and hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia are also risk factors for brain abscess. In the latter, pulmonary arteriovenous malformations may allow bacteria to traverse the pulmonary circulation without removal by capillary filtration or may permit sterile paradoxical emboli of the brain, which then become superinfected (Tunkel, 2004). In immunocompromised individuals (such as those with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), malignancy with use of immunosuppressives, or steroid use), fungal infections are of increased concern.
The clinical outcomes associated with brain abscesses, which were once nearly uniformly fatal, have markedly improved since the advent of computed tomography in the 1970s, along with refinements in surgical drainage technique and improvement in the antimicrobial options (Mathisen and Johnson 1997). The most common presenting complaints are headache and neurologic symptoms (Carpenter J, Stapleton S, and Holliman R. 2007; Tunkel, A. 2004). The neurological symptoms may include confusion or decreased level of consciousness; one or the other was seen in 50% of patients in one review (Carpenter J, Stapleton S, and Holliman R. 2007). There may also be focal neurological symptoms, dysphasia, poor balance, photophobia, impaired memory and seizures; these specific symptoms appear related to the location and size of the abscess. Of note, the classic triad of headache, focal neurologic findings, and fever is present in less than half of patients presenting with brain abscess (Carpenter J, Stapleton S, and Holliman R. 2007; Tunkel 2004).
In this patient, who appeared on initial examinations to have healthy dentition, hematogenous exposure to bacteria by tongue-piercing (Martinello RA and Cooney EL. 2003) was strongly considered, especially with the added risk of a patent foramen ovale. Subsequently, when headache and fever did not resolve, a molar abscess was diagnosed and, in retrospect, this common source of brain abscesses could also have been involved, although given the location of the tooth abscess on the right mandibular side, a direct contiguous spread seems less likely. Lastly, the source of her brain abscess may have been pneumonia.
Final Diagnosis
Brain abscess caused by mixed flora, including Streptococcus anginosus (milleri group) and Peptostreptococcus species, possibly related to lip and tongue piercings, dental abscess, or pneumonia in a patient with a patent foramen ovale.
References
Carpenter, J., Stapleton, S., and Holliman, R. (2007). Retrospective analysis of 49 cases of brain abscess and review of the literature. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 26, 1-11.
PMID:17180609(PubMed abstract) Martinello, R.A., and Cooney, E.L. (2003). Cerebellar brain abscess associated with tongue piercing. Clin Infect Dis 36, e32-34.
PMID:12522766(PubMed abstract) Mathisen, G.E., and Johnson, J.P. (1997). Brain abscess. Clin Infect Dis 25, 763-779; quiz 780-761.
PMID:9356788(PubMed abstract) Tunkel, A. Chapter 84 Brain Abscess. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, and Dolin R, eds., Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 6th edition, 2004, 1150-1163. Elsevier, Churchill, Livingstone.
Carpenter, J., Stapleton, S., and Holliman, R. (2007). Retrospective analysis of 49 cases of brain abscess and review of the literature. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 26, 1-11.
PMID:17180609(PubMed abstract)
Martinello, R.A., and Cooney, E.L. (2003). Cerebellar brain abscess associated with tongue piercing. Clin Infect Dis 36, e32-34.
PMID:12522766(PubMed abstract)
Mathisen, G.E., and Johnson, J.P. (1997). Brain abscess. Clin Infect Dis 25, 763-779; quiz 780-761.
PMID:9356788(PubMed abstract)
Tunkel, A. Chapter 84 Brain Abscess. In: Mandell GL, Bennett JE, and Dolin R, eds., Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 6th edition, 2004, 1150-1163. Elsevier, Churchill, Livingstone.
