History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Case Summary: A woman with increasing abdominal girth and discomfort.
A woman in her forties presented with slowly increasing abdominal girth and occasional abdominal discomfort over two months. During this time, the patient experienced several episodes of fever and night sweats. The patient also complained of ribbon-like stools and irregular menses. On review of systems, the patient reported no neurological, pulmonary, urinary, skin, or musculoskeletal symptoms.
Past Medical History
She was status post left oophorectomy for benign disease in the remote past.
Medications
None.
Epidemiological History
The patient was of Hispanic descent and lived in a city in Texas. She had not traveled recently.
Physical Examination
She appeared well. The temperature was 99.7°F (37.6°C). The abdomen was distended, with normal bowel sounds and an evident fluid wave. It was not tender to palpation, and there were no palpable masses. The remainder of the examination, including the pelvic exam, was normal.
Studies
A complete blood count (CBC) revealed a hematocrit of 35%, a total white blood cell count (WBC) of 6,000/mm³, with 10.1% eosinophils (absolute eosinophil count of 606/mm³). The CA-125 was 365 U/ml (normal range 0.6-35.0) and testing for antibodies to the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative. The urinalysis was normal.
The pelvic ultrasound demonstrated a normal appearing uterus, ascites, and a right ovarian complex hypoechogenic mass. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast enhancement showed massive ascites, a right ovarian complex mass (3-centimeters in diameter, shown in Figure 1), and an irregular anterior abdominal peritoneum suggestive of peritoneal studding (Figure 2).
Figure 1. Pre-op contrast pelvic CT scan.
Figure 2. Pre-op contrast abdominal CT scan.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A laparotomy, with total abdominal hysterectomy/right salpingo-oophorectomy/omentectomy, was peformed for debulking and staging. The peritoneum was studded with malignant-appearing nodules on all serosal surfaces, including the uterus, fallopian tube, and ovary. Frozen sections, however, demonstrated non-caseating granulomatous inflammation (Figure 3).
Figure 3. H and E stain of peritoneal serosa biopsy.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Histopathology (Figure 3) revealed spherules with endospores within non-caseating granulomas, diagnostic of infection with Coccidioides immitis. Calcofluor white examination of centrifuged peritoneal fluid (Figure 4) and urine (Figure 5) also revealed spherules with endospores. Growth of this fungus occurred out of tissue biopsies, peritoneal fluid, and urine.
Figure 4. Calcofluor stain of spun peritoneal fluid (400x).
Figure 5. Calcofluor stain of spun urine (400x).
Treatment and Followup
On the first post-operative day, the patient developed fever, tachycardia, hypotension, and decreased urine output. The patient was treated with fluid resuscitation, liposomal amphotericin B (LAmB), and empiric piperacillin-tazobactam for sepsis. After two days of therapy, the patient improved, and she completed a nine-day total course of LAmB. The antibiotics were changed to oral fluconazole 800 mg daily, which she tolerated well. She was discharged to home with Infectious Diseases follow-up. Prior to discharge, results of a lumbar puncture and bone scan were normal and showed no evidence of further disseminated disease. The serum complement fixation titer was low at 1:2, and the cerebrospinal (CSF) complement fixation titer was negative.
Discussion
Coccidioides immitis is a fungus endemic to the Lower Sonoran life zone of the southwestern United States. Human infection occurs by inhalation of airborne fungal arthoconidia; less than one percent of those so infected will develop extrapulmonary disease. Risk factors for disseminated disease include: black race, Filipino race, pregnancy, HIV infection, and immune suppression. The most common sites of dissemination are skin, bones, joints, and meninges.
At the time of this presentation, no prior description of coccidioidomycosis mimicking ovarian cancer had been reported in the literature. Peritoneal coccidioidomycosis has been described, with 26 cases having been reviewed [Phillips and Ford, 2000]. Mortality occured but perhaps less commonly than expected, with 4 of the 26 (15%) previous cases having died, although two of these did not receive antifungal therapy at all. Only three patients had previously been treated with azoles; one (with ketoconazole) failed, two (one with fluconazole, and one with ketoconazole, then itraconazole) were treated successfully (although these successes were preceded by amphotericin B courses).
The visualization of spherules of C. immitis on microscopy of the pertinent body fluids in this case was a reflection of the heavy load of the organism in her tissues despite the apparent absence of other, more usual sites of infection. The presence of culture-positive C. immitis in urine has been reported in pulmonary (presumed non-disseminated) disease, and the ease of culturing the fungus out of the urine has been suggested as an opportune way to help diagnose coccidioidomycosis. This case demonstrates the protean ability of coccidioidomycosis to present in an uncommon manner, in this case mimicking a more ominous intra-abdominal process.
References:
1. Phillips P and Ford B, Peritoneal coccidioidomycosis: case report and review. Clin Infect Dis. 2000 Jun;30(6):971-6. PMID: 10880320
Final Diagnosis
Peritoneal coccidioidomycosis, caused by Coccidioides immitis.
References
Phillips, P., and Ford, B. (2000). Peritoneal coccidioidomycosis: case report and review. Clin Infect Dis 30, 971-976
PMID:10880320(PubMed abstract)
