History of Present Illness
Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A middle-aged man with fever, cough and diarrhea.
A middle-aged man, status post heart transplantation, presented with fever, cough, and diarrhea.
Six years earlier, the patient had required heart transplantation for dilated cardiomyopathy. Five months before admission, mild rejection occurred. Azathioprine was stopped and mycophenolate and prednisone were begun.
One month before admission, shortly after consuming bottled spring water and barbequed beef, he developed nausea, vomiting, and severe, non-bloody diarrhea. Two weeks later, sore throat, sinus congestion, cough with white sputum and fever developed. One week before admission, he had increasing dyspnea and fever to 104°F (40°C).
Past Medical History
There was a history of chronic renal insufficiency and dilated cardiomyopathy that had necessitated heart transplantation. The donor and recipient had negative serologies for cytomegalovirus (CMV) and toxoplasmosis. The recipient was varicella zoster virus (VZV) and Epstein Barr virus (EBV) antibody positive.
Medications
Medications included mycophenolate (1500 mg twice daily), prednisone (10 mg daily) and cyclosporine.
Epidemiological History
The patient lived with his wife and owned dogs and birds. He worked in the construction industry and denied recent travel.
Physical Examination
The patient was diaphoretic and dyspneic, using accessory muscles of respiration while receiving 6 liters of supplemental oxygen. The temperature was 101°F (38.3°C), blood pressure 126/68 mm/Hg and pulse 102 beats/minute. Examination of the head, ear, eye, nose and throat was normal and without lymphadenopathy. Jugulovenous distension (JVD) was 10-12 centimeters. The lungs had diffuse upper airway wheezes and rhonchi. There were coarse rales at the left base with egophony and dullness to percussion. Heart sounds were distant and the abdomen was distended, tympanitic, soft without rebound, guarding, or hepatomegaly. There was 2+ edema of the extremities.
Studies
The white blood cells count was 6700/mm³, serum urea nitrogen 66 mg/dL, creatinine 4.7 mg/dL, carbon dioxide 15 mmol/L, anion gap 15 and alkaline phosphatase 61 U/L. Other liver function tests were normal.
The chest radiograph is shown in Figure 1 and computed tomography (CT) of the chest is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph.
Figure 2. CT scan of the chest.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient's respiratory status declined quickly and mechanical ventilation was initiated. Empiric treatment with vancomycin, ceftazidime, levofloxacin, metronidazole, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and ganciclovir was administered. Hemodialysis was begun after renal function declined further. The patient required intermittent pressor support.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The chest radiograph (Figure 1) demonstrated a dense left upper and patchy left lower lobe consolidation and small left pleural effusion. The non-contrast, high-resolution CT scan of the chest (Figure 2) demonstrated extensive, severe consolidation involving both the left upper and left lower lobes, accompanied by a small left pleural effusion. Cardiomegaly, mild hilar adenopathy and a slight mediastinal shift to the right were present.
Cultures of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) specimens were negative for bacterial, fungal, mycobacterial, and Legionella growth. Staining for Pneumocystis was negative, as were cultures for cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), and varicella zoster virus (VZV). Stool specimens, sent for bacterial pathogens, ova and parasites, Cryptosporidium, microsporidia, Clostridium difficile, and mycobacteria were negative. Cryptococcal serum antigen and urine Legionella and Histoplasma antigens were negative. Serologic testing for CMV and coccidioidomycosis were negative. On the fifth hospital day, adenovirus cultures were positive from bronchoalveolar lavage and stool specimens, and subsequently identified as adenovirus serotype 7.
Treatment and Followup
Given the limited therapeutic options to treat adenovirus, cidofovir was begun on the sixth hospital day. The hospital course was complicated by pneumothorax and pneumomediastinum. The patient became neutropenic, presumably secondary to cidofovir.
Candida krusei line infection, upper and lower gastrointestinal bleeding, and seizures followed. The patient expired on the twenty-eighth hospital day. No pathogen other than adenovirus was isolated.
Discussion
The differential diagnosis of pneumonia in this immunocompromised, heart-transplant patient is broad. This patient's illness is consistent with severe adenovirus infection (serotype 7). Adenoviruses, a family of DNA viruses, infect the epithelial cells of the respiratory, GI, and GU tracts. There have been over 50 serotypes identified and these cause a variety of clinical syndromes. Adenoviruses are ubiquitous and primary infection usually occurs within the first year of life, resulting in serotype-specific immunity.
In immunocompetent hosts, adenoviruses generally cause self-limited or asymptomatic infection, most often involving the respiratory tract and conjunctiva. Adenovirus accounts for 2-7% of childhood respiratory infections and 5-10% of acute diarrheal illnesses. Serotype 7, in particular, is associated with acute upper and lower respiratory tract infections, especially in military recruits and can cause fulminant bronchiolitis and pneumonia in infants.
In immunocompetent patients, adenoviruses can also cause acute hemorrhagic cystitis, epidemic keratoconjunctivitis, and tonsillopharyngitis. Although the infection is generally self-limited in immunocompetent patients, adenovirus can cause a disseminated, fatal infection in immunocompromised individuals.
Adenoviruses cause lytic infection, but are also capable of establishing latency. Disease in immunocompromised hosts can occur either due to primary infection or reactivation. In transplant patients, the transplanted organ is often the site of infection, perhaps due to reactivation of latent virus in the transplanted organ or limited host immune surveillance in the allograft recipient. Infection in transplant patients is associated with case fatality rates of approximately 50%. There have been case reports of disseminated adenovirus infections years after transplantation.
Since viral shedding is reasonably common, attributing symptomatic disease to adenoviral infection can be difficult given the variety of other possible etiologies. Exclusion of other causes is often used to establish probable disease, but definitive disease requires histopathology, which is often not available. There is no established therapy for adenovirus infections. Anti-viral therapies have been attempted, in particular with ribaviran, ganciclovir, and cidofovir, but the data regarding their efficacy remain anecdotal. There are no randomized trials, and therefore the treatment of choice, if any, is not certain. Cidofovir may have significant toxicities associated, most notably renal failure and myelosuppression, both of which complicated the care of this particular patient.
Final Diagnosis
Adenoviral (serotype 7) pneumonia in an immunocompromised patient.
References
