History of Present Illness
A man in his 40s presented with progressive edema and pain of the right lateral forefoot for one month on a background of poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus complicated by diabetic neuropathy, erectile dysfunction and diabetic retinopathy. He denied any recent trauma to the foot but recalled dropping a heavy object on his right foot 16 years ago which resulted in a laceration that required suturing. About a month prior to presentation, he noticed pressure and tightness around his right lateral forefoot. The swelling and pain progressed to the point where he had to stop playing soccer as his foot would not fit into his usual shoes. Several days prior to admission, he squeezed the area of swelling and expelled turbid whitish fluid. He consulted his primary care doctor who ordered plain films of the right foot and referred him to the Emergency Department for further work-up.
Past Medical History
He has hypertension and poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus on metformin and insulin (recent hemoglobin A1C 9.6%). He previously tested positive on tuberculin skin testing decades ago but is unclear if he received isoniazid prophylaxis. Twenty years ago, he developed a right cranial nerve V and cranial nerve VII palsy for which there was no clear diagnosis despite a lumbar puncture and nerve biopsy (also negative for acid fast bacilli). He has no known allergies.
Medications
Medications were amlodipine, lisinopril, simvastatin, aspirin, gabapentin, metformin, short- and long-acting insulin. He was only intermittently adherent.
Epidemiological History
The patient was born and raised in Guatemala. He immigrated to the US about 20 years ago. He lives in the Northeast US and returns to Guatemala every few months with no other significant travel. He recalls being bitten by insects in Guatemala but denies any insect or tick bites in the US. He is a non-smoker. He has no pets.
Physical Examination
On exam, the patient appeared well. The blood pressure was 138/86 mmHg, pulse 89 beats per minute, temperature 37.3 °C (99.2 °F). His right foot showed edema and tenderness to palpation in the area of the 5th toe (Figure 1). There was a small, scabbed skin defect overlying the 5th metatarsophalangeal joint. Active and passive motion in the 5th toe was limited by pain. There was an old, hypopigmented scar on the dorsal midfoot over the 2ndmetatarsal.
Figure 1. Photograph of the right forefoot.
Studies
Plain film of his right foot demonstrated diffuse soft tissue swelling of the 5th toe and lateral foot as well as cortical irregularity of the lateral aspect of the 5thmetatarsal shaft and head (Figure 2). Routine laboratory tests, including white blood cell count and C reactive protein, were normal except for hyperglycemia. A hemoglobin A1c was 9.6% (reference range 4.3-6.4%). Uric acid was normal. A T-spot interferon-gamma release assay for tuberculosis was negative. An HIV screening test had been negative. Figure 2. Plain XR film of the right foot. Arrows indicate: diffuse soft tissue swelling of the 5th toe and lateral foot; cortical irregularity of the lateral aspect of the 5th metatarsal shaft and head
Figure 2. Plain XR film of the right foot. Arrows indicate: diffuse soft tissue swelling of the 5th toe and lateral foot; cortical irregularity of the lateral aspect of the 5th metatarsal shaft and head
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
An MRI with intravenous contrast of the foot was performed (Figures 3 and 4) which demonstrated an enhancing, infiltrative appearing soft tissue mass involving the proximal phalanx of the right 5th toe. This also extended into and around the tendon sheath and along the dorsum of the foot, around the extensor tendons and the subcutaneous fat. There was also patchy marrow enhancement in the more proximal 5th metatarsal shaft consistent with osteomyelitis.
Figure 3. Figure 3: MRI of the right foot - T1 sagittal (post-contrast). Arrows indicate: infiltrative soft tissue mass centered within 5th toe; patchy marrow edema in the metatarsal shaft suggestive of osteomyelitis
Figure 3: MRI of the right foot - T1 sagittal (post-contrast). Arrows indicate: infiltrative soft tissue mass centered within 5th toe; patchy marrow edema in the metatarsal shaft suggestive of osteomyelitis
Figure 4. MRI of the right foot – T1 short axis (post- contrast). Arrow indicates: infiltrative soft tissue mass centered within 5th toe, traversing multiple compartments
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
An ultrasound-guided biopsy of the mass was obtained. Histology showed granular mycelial growth of pigmented hyphae with a granular-histiocytic inflammatory response (Figure 5) diagnostic of eumycetoma (maduromycosis). Speciation of the fungal organism based on histologic appearance was not possible. Several weeks after the initial encounter with our patient, a fungal organism grew on culture that was characterized as a dematiaceous (melanized) mold and eventually identified as Biatriospora (previously Pyrenochaeta) mackinnonii.
Figure 5. Histopathology of soft tissue biopsy from right foot. Giemsa stain (40x). Arrows indicate: granular mycelial growth of pigmented hyphae fungi with a granulo-histiocytic inflammatory response
Treatment and Followup
The patient was started on voriconazole that he has tolerated well. A voriconazole trough level has been therapeutic. There is only sparse evidence, mainly on the case-report level, guiding the treatment of eumycetoma. Therapy usually consists of several months to years of antifungal treatment and may involve surgery depending on extension of disease and clinical trajectory. One year after initiation of treatment, our patient had mild persistent pain in the foot, and on imaging showed some improvement of the soft tissue inflammation, however, bone involvement had progressed and, in addition to stable disease on the 5th proximal phalanx, there was now near complete marrow replacement in the 5th metatarsal. A 5th ray amputation has been discussed with the patient, to which he has agreed. In addition to surgery, we are planning to continue the antifungal treatment and monitor the patient clinically.
Discussion
There are over 100 species of dematiaceous or melanized (pigmented) fungi (mostly molds) which are known to cause human disease. They have a worldwide distribution and are mostly found in soil or associated with plant matter. Biatriospora (previously Pyrenochaeta) mackinnonii is one of the rarer dematiaceous molds, and is also a soil, wood and plant matter organism. More common examples of dematiaceous molds include Madurella spp., Fonsecaea spp., Cladiosporium spp. and Alternaria spp.. There are a few specific clinical syndromes which are attributed to dematiaceous fungi, such as mycetoma and chromoblastocyosis, both seen predominantly in the tropics, and phaeohyphomycosis and other conditions such as sinusitis, allergic reactions or central nervous system infections.
Mycetoma represents a chronic progressive granulomatous infection of the skin and subcutaneous tissue.[1] It has been described worldwide but is much more common in the tropics and subtropical areas.[2,3] It is characterized by the triad of local edema (typically painless), sinus tracts and discharge with granules or grains (often visible).[4] Clinically, bacterial mycetoma (actinomycetoma, most commonly caused by Nocardia brasiliensis) is indistinguishable from fungal mycetoma (eumycetoma, most commonly caused by Madurella spp. and Pseudallescheria boydii, an anamorph of Lomentospora (previously Scedosporium) apiospermum).[6]
Eumycetoma has been described as a “deep tissue infection, usually of the lower extremities, characterized by the presence of mycotic granules.”[8] There is a male predominance (5:1). In most cases, the feet are affected. Small injuries when walking barefoot in the tropics can lead to inoculation with these fungal organisms that are usually not very virulent.[5] The formation of grain-like structures filled with densely packed organisms protects the fungi from the immune response. The lesions are typically firm and nontender and there usually is no erythema.
Chromoblastomycosis (also called chromomycosis or verrucous dermatitis) is a term used for fungal infection of the skin and subcutaneous tissue, in most cases caused by one of only a few species of dematiaceous fungi that produce characteristic sclerotic bodies in tissue and is usually seen in tropical areas.[8] Since it primarily affects the skin, it tends to be more superficial and, in contrast to eumycetoma, there is mostly visible skin involvement with lesions that appear patchy, nodular, or scar-like (and can therefore clinically resemble other diseases of the skin). Whereas eumycetoma and chromoblastomycosis are predominantly local infections, phaeohyphomycosis is a term generally reserved for the remainder of clinical syndromes caused by melanized fungi, including disseminated infections.
Besides actinomycetoma, the differential includes tuberculous osteomyelitis, atypical mycobacterial infection, and malignancy. Further evaluation is important to guide the choice of treatment. Unless the diagnosis can be confirmed by the secretion of the typical granules with elements of melanized mold, given the broad differential, usually a biopsy is required to distinguish eumycetoma from other, non-fungal infections and malignancy. Histology usually shows the densely packed fungi.
On microscopy, bacterial mycetoma can be distinguished from eumycetoma. Fungal cultures with speciation and susceptibility testing help to guide the choice of an antifungal regimen. Typically, azoles such as voriconazole, posaconazole or itraconazole are used.[7] Surgery for debulking is considered on an individual basis, depending on the extension of tissue destruction (like bony involvement), and the fungal species and sensitivities. Medical treatment with antifungals is often continued for extended periods (3-24 months) which is mainly based on case studies in the absence of randomized controlled trials.[9]
Final Diagnosis
Eumycetoma due to infection with Biatriospora (Pyrenochaeta) mackinnonii
References
Hospenthal DR. Agents of mycetoma. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 8th ed 2015. Chapter 263, pages 2929-33. Zijlstra EE, van de Sande WW, Welsh O, et al. Lancet Infect Dis. 2016(1):100-12.
PMID:26738840(PubMed abstract) Fahal AH.Mycetoma: a global medical and socio-economic dilemma. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2017;11(4). e0005509.
PMID:28426654(PubMed abstract) Efared B, Tahiri L, Boubacar MS, et al. Mycetoma in a non-endemic area: a diagnostic challenge. BMC Clin Pathol 2017;17:1.
PMID:28167862(PubMed abstract) Schibli A, Goldenberger D, Krieg A, et al. Painless swelling of the forefoot and recurrent subcutaneous abscesses of the lower leg – Two distinct presentations illustrating the spectrum of eumycetoma in nonendemic country. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2017;11(4).
PMID:28406907(PubMed abstract) Sampaio FM, Wanke B, Freitas DF, et al. Review of 21 cases of mycetoma from 1991 to 2014 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. PloS Negl Trop Dis 2017;11(2).e0005301.
PMID:28192433(PubMed abstract) Nenoff P, van de Sande WW, Fahal AH, et al. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2015 (10):1873-83.
PMID:25726758(PubMed abstract) Revankar SG, Sutton DA. Melanized fungi in human disease. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2010;23 (4):884-928.
PMID:20930077(PubMed abstract) Wadal A, Elhassan TA, Zein HA, Abdel-Rahman ME, Fahal AH. Predictors of Post-operative Mycetoma Recurrence Using Machine-Learning Algorithms: The Mycetoma Research Center Experience. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016;10(10):e0005007
PMID:27798643(PubMed abstract)
Hospenthal DR. Agents of mycetoma. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 8th ed 2015. Chapter 263, pages 2929-33.
Zijlstra EE, van de Sande WW, Welsh O, et al. Lancet Infect Dis. 2016(1):100-12.
PMID:26738840(PubMed abstract)
Fahal AH.Mycetoma: a global medical and socio-economic dilemma. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2017;11(4). e0005509.
PMID:28426654(PubMed abstract)
Efared B, Tahiri L, Boubacar MS, et al. Mycetoma in a non-endemic area: a diagnostic challenge. BMC Clin Pathol 2017;17:1.
PMID:28167862(PubMed abstract)
Schibli A, Goldenberger D, Krieg A, et al. Painless swelling of the forefoot and recurrent subcutaneous abscesses of the lower leg – Two distinct presentations illustrating the spectrum of eumycetoma in nonendemic country. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2017;11(4).
PMID:28406907(PubMed abstract)
Sampaio FM, Wanke B, Freitas DF, et al. Review of 21 cases of mycetoma from 1991 to 2014 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. PloS Negl Trop Dis 2017;11(2).e0005301.
PMID:28192433(PubMed abstract)
Nenoff P, van de Sande WW, Fahal AH, et al. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2015 (10):1873-83.
PMID:25726758(PubMed abstract)
Revankar SG, Sutton DA. Melanized fungi in human disease. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2010;23 (4):884-928.
PMID:20930077(PubMed abstract)
Wadal A, Elhassan TA, Zein HA, Abdel-Rahman ME, Fahal AH. Predictors of Post-operative Mycetoma Recurrence Using Machine-Learning Algorithms: The Mycetoma Research Center Experience. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016;10(10):e0005007
PMID:27798643(PubMed abstract)
