History of Present Illness
Summary: A middle-aged man with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection developed fever, a productive cough and pleuritic chest pain.
A man in his fifties (A patient’s age is often a critical factor in the diagnosis of infectious diseases, affecting both the spectrum of illness and type of organisms involved.) with human immunodeficiency virus (Patients who are immunosuppressed are susceptible to infections with both common and uncommon organisms, with the risk and spectrum of illness related to the extent of CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count depression.) (HIV) infection presented to an emergency department because of fever, a productive cough and pleuritic chest pain (Terminology: Pleuritic pain refers to sharp pain on inhalation and/or coughing. Learning point: The combination of fever, a productive cough and pleuritic chest pain should always raise the possibility of a lower respiratory tract infection, specifically pneumonia. Pleuritic chest pain is often indicative of an underlying pulmonary process, particularly when there is inflammation of the lung pleura.).
The patient had been well until four days before presentation, when malaise occurred, followed by fever to 104°F (40°C), chills (The combination of fever with chills is suggestive of possible bacteremia.) and a cough productive of yellow-green sputum. Intense chest pain developed and he went to a local emergency department. He had stopped his antiretroviral medications (efavirenz, emtricitabine and tenofovir) because of unpleasant side-effects and had run out of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is an antibiotic prescribed for Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia, which was previously referred to as Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP). PCP prophylaxis is advised in patients whose level of CD4 T-lymphocyte cells is less than 200 cells per cubic millimeter; lack of this prophylaxis puts such individuals at high risk of developing PCP infection.) a few weeks before presentation.
One week before presentation, he had visited southern California (A history of travel is extremely important in determining the differential diagnoses of an infection, as some infections are more prevalent in certain geographic areas.) with his family. At the time, two other family members were sick with respiratory symptoms (Exposure to a person with similar symptoms is often an important diagnostic clue.). There was no history of headache, confusion, diarrhea or abdominal pain.
Past Medical History
The patient had been diagnosed with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection more than 15 years earlier. Eight months before admission, the level of CD4 T-cell lymphocytes was 80 cells per cubic millimeter and the level of HIV-RNA was 75,000 copies/ml. Over the course of the preceding year, he had been seen in emergency departments twice and admitted to the hospital once for pneumococcal pneumonia, which had been confirmed by sputum culture.
Four months after admission, testing of the urine for pneumococcal antigen was positive. He had been immunized with the pneumococcal vaccine (The pneumococcal vaccine PPV23 is a polyvalent vaccine against 23 serotypes of pneumococcus and is recommended for adults over the age of 65 and for younger individuals at increased risk of invasive pneumococcal infection due to chronic cardiovascular or pulmonary disease, diabetes mellitus or immunocompromised status.) in the period between both episodes. Other medical problems included asthma, hypertension, and Hepatitis C virus infection. There were no known allergies.
Medications
Medications included lisinopril daily and albuterol-metered dose inhaler intermittently. He had stopped antiretroviral medications and had recently run out of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Social History
He lived with his family.
Epidemiological History
He had 2 cats in his home, and smoked (Long-standing smokers are not only more susceptible to pulmonary infections but are also at increased risk of malignancies. The occurrence of recurrent pneumonias in the same anatomical location in such individuals is highly suspicious for an obstructive lesion caused by a malignancy. Active smokers are also at increased risk of pneumococcal bacteremia and Legionella infection.) 20 cigarettes per day, with a 40 pack-year history.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared comfortable. The temperature was 99.5°F (37.5°C), pulse (The normal range for heart rates can vary widely depending on the individual, but in general a heart rate over 100 would be considered tachycardia.) 118 beats per minute, blood pressure (The normal blood pressure range is generally 90-139 systolic and 60-85 diastolic.) 151/88 mm Hg, respirations (The normal respiratory rate ranges between 12-20 breaths per minute.) 16 per minute and oxygen saturation (The normal range of oxygen saturation while breathing ambient air is 95-100%.) 93% while breathing ambient air. There was no evidence of tonsillar exudates (Terminology: Exudate in this context refers to typically whitish pus, consisting of white blood cells, which is visible on the tonsils and often indicates acute bacterial infection.), oral thrush or generalized lymphadenopathy. Auscultation of the lungs revealed crackles and bronchial breath sounds (Terminology: Bronchial breath sounds are loud, harsh breath sounds that are normally heard over the trachea, the presence of these on auscultation of the lungs often indicates underlying consolidation, as in pneumonia, or atelectasis.) on the anterior aspect of the right lung. Egophony (Terminology: Egophony is said to occur when a patient says the letter “e” and the examiner hears the letter “a” on auscultation. It is heard in any condition that results in pulmonary consolidation, such as pneumonia.) and bronchophony (Terminology: Bronchophony is clear transmission of the patient\'s spoken voice through the chest wall. It results from alveolar consolidation, such as in pneumonia.) were also present over the same area. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 26,000/mm³ (reference range 5,000-11,000) with 7% band forms (Terminology: Newly-created neutrophils have a band-like nucleus visible under the microscope. The presence of many bands suggest the immune system is making a large number of new white blood cells, possibly in response to a severe infection.). The serum sodium level was 133 mmol/L (It is not uncommon to have slightly low sodium levels in the context of pulmonary infections; this may be due to the syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH) hypersecretion. Extremely low sodium levels should alert the clinician to the possibility of Legionella infection.). Tests of liver function were normal.
Chest radiographs (Figures 1 and 2) revealed an opacity in the upper zone of the right lung, most consistent with a right upper lobe pneumonia, as well as possible opacification in the left lower lobe, with no evidence of a pleural effusion.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph on admission.
Figure 2. Chest radiograph, lateral view, on admission.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Specimens of blood and sputum were sent for culture, followed by the administration of ceftriaxone and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. A gram stain of the sputum (A sputum sample with minimal epithelial cells is best for analysis of lower respiratory infections. A large number of epithelial cells should alert the clinician to the possibility of contamination with oral flora possibly rendering the results of the gram stain invalid. The presence of white blood cells suggests inflammation and the presence of large numbers of neutrophils is suggestive of bacterial infection.) is shown in Figures 3 and 4.
Figure 3. Gram stain of sputum.
Figure 4. Gram stain of sputum.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The gram stain showed some cocci in chains and a predominance of gram-positive encapsulated lancet-shaped diplococci, which were highly suggestive of Streptococcus pneumoniae (Pneumococcus). Cultures of the blood and sputum grew S. pneumoniae.
Figure 5. Sputum culture on blood agar plate.
Treatment and Followup
After blood cultures grew gram-positive cocci and before sensitivities were known, vancomycin (Vancomycin is an antibiotic with very broad activity against gram-positive organisms, including pneumococci resistant to other antibiotics.) was added. The dose of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was adjusted from that suitable for treatment of Pneumocystis jiroveci infection to Pneumocystis prophylaxis.
Antibiotic sensitivities revealed the organism was sensitive to ceftriaxone (Ceftriaxone is a third-generation cephalosporin that, at the time of this publication, is effective against most organisms commonly causing community-acquired pneumonia; however atypical organisms would not be covered by this antibiotic.), and the vancomycin was discontinued (Once the identity of the organism and the range of antibiotic sensitivities are known, antibiotics can be more precisely targeted against the relevant pathogen.). Ceftriaxone was continued intravenously for 7 days, with improvement. Upon discharge, oral cefpodoxime (Cefpodoxime is a fourth-generation cephalosporin that can be taken orally.) was prescribed for 1-week, for a total duration of antibiotic therapy of 14 days (An adult who requires hospitalization for community-acquired pneumonia should be treated with antibiotics for a minimum of 5 days; however the duration of therapy should be individualized based on the comorbidities and the clinical response to treatment.). Follow-up for a post-treatment chest radiograph was arranged, in order to document complete resolution of the infiltrate.
Discussion
This patient's presentation with history of exposure to sick contacts, symptoms of less than one week’s duration, fever and cough with mucopurulent sputum, in combination with leukocytosis, bandemia and lobar consolidation on chest radiograph, was most consistent with acute community-acquired bacterial pneumonia. The presence of gram-positive diplococci on the sputum gram stain was highly suggestive of Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) infection.
The radiographic appearance of a lobar pneumonia is less suggestive of infections by atypical bacteria or viral infections, which more commonly cause diffuse, patchy infiltrates on chest radiographs. The acute 4-day time course was neither suggestive of the biphasic illness seen with influenza complicated by bacterial superinfection, nor of tuberculosis, a serious co-infection in patients with HIV infection in many parts of the world, which has a typically more gradual onset. Lastly, once the results of the sputum gram stain were known, other possible pathogens were thought to be less likely: the gram-positive cocci of Staphylococcus aureus would more commonly be found in clusters; Mycoplasma pneumoniae are more typically pleomorphic and stain poorly with gram stain; Legionella and Chlamydophila pneumoniae (formerly Chlamydia pneumoniae) are both pleomorphic and poorly gram-staining or gram-negative bacilli and Haemophilus influenzae are small gram-negative coccobacilli. Pneumocystis jiroveci, a fungus, would also not appear as lancet-shaped gram-positive diplococci.
In most series, pneumococcal pneumonia is the most common cause of community-acquired pneumonia [Donowitz 2009]. Individuals who are HIV-positive, even those on highly active anti-retroviral therapy and with normal levels of CD4 T-lymphocytes, are at increased risk compared with the general population of developing pneumococcal disease, including pneumonia requiring hospitalization [Sogaard et al 2008]. In this patient, with a low CD4 T-lymphocyte count and lacking both anti-retroviral therapy and PCP prophylaxis, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole therapy for PCP infection was administered until the results of the gram stain were available, given the potentially grave consequences of missing this diagnosis, and the amount was converted to prophylactic dosing once the bacterial infection was diagnosed.
At the time of this publication, a beta-lactam antibiotic, with or without a macrolide (Macrolides are antibiotics which generally are effective against atypical bacteria such as Mycoplasma and Chlamydia.), is a good choice for the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia, especially when the suspicion for pneumococcal infection is high. Given the high incidence of penicillin-resistant pneumococci, third or fourth generation cephalosporins are usually preferred over penicillin for severe pneumococcal infections. Mismatch between the antibiotic spectrum and the susceptibility of a common causative organism, infection with a pathogen not covered by the usual empirical regimen, and nosocomial superinfection are major causes of apparent antibiotic failure. As per current recommendations, [WHO 2009] this immunocompromised patient had received the pneumococcal vaccine after recovery from a previous pneumococcal infection because infection with one serotype does not necessarily provide protection against the others. There is evidence that vaccination helps to protect against invasive pneumococcal disease; however, it remains controversial whether vaccination has significant protective effect against pneumonia [Huss et al 2009; Moberley et al 2008]. Additionally, it is not clear if the vaccine is effective if administered to an HIV-positive individual with a viral load greater than 100,000 copies/ml [Teshale et al 2008].
Final Diagnosis
Community-acquired pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae (Pneumococcus) in a patient with HIV infection.
References
Donowitz GR in Chapter 64, Acute Pneumonia, Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infecious Diseases, 7th Edition. 2009 Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier. Huss, A., Scott, P., Stuck, A.E., Trotter, C., and Egger, M. (2009). Efficacy of pneumococcal vaccination in adults: a meta-analysis. CMAJ 180, 48-58.
PMID:19124790(PubMed abstract) Mandell, L.A., Wunderink, R.G., Anzueto, A., Bartlett, J.G., Campbell, G.D., Dean, N.C., Dowell, S.F., File, T.M., Jr., Musher, D.M., Niederman, M.S., Torres, A., and Whitney, C.G. (2007). Infectious Diseases Society of America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the management of community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin Infect Dis 44 Suppl 2, S27-72.
PMID:17278083(PubMed abstract) Moberley, S.A., Holden, J., Tatham, D.P., and Andrews, R.M. (2008). Vaccines for preventing pneumococcal infection in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, CD000422.
PMID:18253977(PubMed abstract) Sogaard, O.S., Lohse, N., Gerstoft, J., Kronborg, G., Ostergaard, L., Pedersen, C., Pedersen, G., Sorensen, H.T., and Obel, N. (2008). Hospitalization for pneumonia among individuals with and without HIV infection, 1995-2007: a Danish population-based, nationwide cohort study. Clin Infect Dis 47, 1345-1353.
PMID:18834317(PubMed abstract) Teshale, E.H., Hanson, D., Flannery, B., Phares, C., Wolfe, M., Schuchat, A., and Sullivan, P. (2008). Effectiveness of 23-valent polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccine on pneumonia in HIV-infected adults in the United States, 1998--2003. Vaccine 26, 5830-5834.
PMID:18786586(PubMed abstract) World Health Organization (WHO) Initiative for Vaccine Research Division. Acute Respiratory Infections (Update September 2009), Streptococcus pneumoniae. Available at http://www.who.int/vaccine_research/diseases/ari/en/index3.html; last accessed March 4, 2010.
Donowitz GR in Chapter 64, Acute Pneumonia, Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infecious Diseases, 7th Edition. 2009 Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier.
Huss, A., Scott, P., Stuck, A.E., Trotter, C., and Egger, M. (2009). Efficacy of pneumococcal vaccination in adults: a meta-analysis. CMAJ 180, 48-58.
PMID:19124790(PubMed abstract)
Mandell, L.A., Wunderink, R.G., Anzueto, A., Bartlett, J.G., Campbell, G.D., Dean, N.C., Dowell, S.F., File, T.M., Jr., Musher, D.M., Niederman, M.S., Torres, A., and Whitney, C.G. (2007). Infectious Diseases Society of America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the management of community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin Infect Dis 44 Suppl 2, S27-72.
PMID:17278083(PubMed abstract)
Moberley, S.A., Holden, J., Tatham, D.P., and Andrews, R.M. (2008). Vaccines for preventing pneumococcal infection in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, CD000422.
PMID:18253977(PubMed abstract)
Sogaard, O.S., Lohse, N., Gerstoft, J., Kronborg, G., Ostergaard, L., Pedersen, C., Pedersen, G., Sorensen, H.T., and Obel, N. (2008). Hospitalization for pneumonia among individuals with and without HIV infection, 1995-2007: a Danish population-based, nationwide cohort study. Clin Infect Dis 47, 1345-1353.
PMID:18834317(PubMed abstract)
Teshale, E.H., Hanson, D., Flannery, B., Phares, C., Wolfe, M., Schuchat, A., and Sullivan, P. (2008). Effectiveness of 23-valent polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccine on pneumonia in HIV-infected adults in the United States, 1998--2003. Vaccine 26, 5830-5834.
PMID:18786586(PubMed abstract)
World Health Organization (WHO) Initiative for Vaccine Research Division. Acute Respiratory Infections (Update September 2009), Streptococcus pneumoniae. Available at http://www.who.int/vaccine_research/diseases/ari/en/index3.html; last accessed March 4, 2010.
