History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Summary: A young adult with leg ulcers for several months.
A young adult woman from a rural village in the Republic of Guinea presented to the outpatient clinic of a regional hospital complaining of painless ulcers on her right leg that had progressed for several months. Before the onset of the ulcers, she had sustained a laceration to the lateral aspect of her right ankle in a farming accident.
Several weeks after this occurrence, she noted a subcutaneous nodule, the size of her thumbnail, at the site of the laceration. The lesion was painless and pruritic, and had gradually broken down and developed into an enlarging cutaneous ulcer that expanded over her right ankle and foot. She denied fever, chills or any other constitutional symptoms.
Epidemiological History
She was from a rural village along a river in a southern province of the Republic of Guinea.
Physical Examination
She was appearing well and looked her stated age. The temperature was 36.8°C (98.2°F), blood pressure 110/82 mm Hg, pulse 72 beats per minute, and respirations 16 breaths per minute. On her right ankle and on the dorsal surface of her foot, there were two large full-thickness ulcers consisting of necrotic eschar with a clear line of demarcation between affected and unaffected tissue (7 centimeters by 14 cm and 6 cm by 6 cm, respectively; Figure 1). There was a small amount of edema around the lesion; however, there was no edema of her leg. The ulcers were painless and not malodorous. The remainder of the physical examination was normal. Figure 1. Physical findings.
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 10,200 cells/mm³, hemoglobin 12.1 gm/dL and platelets 393,000/mm³.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Buruli ulcer was diagnosed clinically, by means of the World Health Organization (WHO) standard case definition. Buruli ulcer is an infectious disease involving the skin, which begins with a painless nodule, papule, plaque or edema and evolves into a painless ulcer with undermined edges. This skin lesion is characterized by necrotic center, undermined edges and edematous skin. In the absence of superinfection, ulcers are painless or minimally painful, and not significantly malodorous.
Treatment and Followup
Given the advanced nature of her presentation, she was immediately admitted and had the wound surgically debrided the following morning. She remained in the hospital for three months for observation, daily soaks, and wound care. In an effort to make the wound inhospitable to common skin organisms, the attending physician wrapped the wound twice daily with sugar-laden bandages. It is hypothesized that the sugar absorbs fluid from the wound while altering the pH. Figure 2 demonstrates a good response to debridement and local wound treatment, with a continued clear area of demarcation but healthy confluent granulation tissue.
Figure 2. Physical findings.
Discussion
Buruli ulcer is a disease of the skin caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans; its etiological factors and transmission are not known. Clues to transmission, however, can be found in environmental factors. The endemic foci of disease tend to occur in the wetlands of tropical and subtropical countries implying that an essential feature in the survival of the causative agent is probably environmental. Indeed focal outbreaks have followed alterations to the environment such as flooding, human migrations, and man-made topographic modifications such as dams and resorts. Destruction of forest and increase of agricultural activities in countries in West Africa have more than likely contributed to the rapid emergence and increased incidence rates of the disease.
Children under the age of 15 years have the highest rate of disease prevalence. Nevertheless, individuals of all ages are affected and both genders are equally affected. West and Central Africa have the highest burden of this disease.
The pathophysiology of Buruli ulcer has not been well established. Trauma from the slight (e.g. hypodermic needle) to the sizeable (e.g. land-mine explosion) is thought to precede infection. Once inoculated, M. ulcerans proliferates and produces a toxin that causes necrosis of the dermis, panniculus, and deep fascia. As the necrosis develops, it extends to the overlying dermis and epidermis, which at this point is closed. The necrosis promotes an ulceration of the overlying tissue with undermined edges and a necrotic slough in the base of the ulcer. At this time in the course of the disease, clusters of extracellular acid-fast bacilli are frequently limited to the base of the ulcer and adjacent necrotic subcutaneous tissue. There are few inflammatory cells in active lesions, possibly due to immunosuppressive activity of the toxin. With healing, there is a granulomatous response and a depressed scar eventually replaces the ulcerated area.
The clinical presentation of Buruli ulcers varies. The lesion may initially present as a pruritic nodule, which then ulcerates. An ulcer may remain small and heal without treatment, or may spread rapidly and undermine the skin over large areas, possibly including an entire leg, thigh, or arm. Involvement of eyes, breasts and genitalia has been described and, reportedly, these organs may be severely damaged or completely necrosed. Involvement of the bone, osteomyelitis, has led to amputation. Deformity and extensive scarring are likely to occur without appropriate treatment, yet most lesions will heal spontaneously.
The diagnosis of Buruli ulcer can be made accurately in highly endemic areas based on the history and physical examination. Laboratory investigations, if available, can also be utilized to increase diagnostic yield. Smears from the base of ulcers may reveal acid-fast bacilli. Growth of M. ulcerans can be accomplished from cultures from lesions; growth of the organism may take months. Biopsy of necrotic tissue can also be diagnostic. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a useful tool for diagnosis when the culture or histopathologic analyses fails to reveal a causative organism.
Debridement and good wound management remain the mainstay of management of Buruli ulcer. Unfortunately, there are no effective prophylactic measures.
Final Diagnosis
Buruli ulcer (Mycobacterium ulcerans infection).
References
