History of Present Illness
Summary: A middle-aged man with fever and abdominal pain.
A man in his fifties was three years status post cadaveric renal transplant when he was admitted to a hospital for fever and abdominal pain. He had also noted an erythematous maculopapular rash on his face, trunk, and extremities.
Past Medical History
He was status post cadaveric renal transplant, and had a history of cytomegalovirus (CMV) colitis, and hypertension.
Medications
Medications included prednisone, mycophenolate mofetil, and azathioprine.
Physical Examination
He was toxic in appearance, and the temperature was 103°F (39.4°C). The abdomen was tender, and a maculopapular rash was noted across his face, trunk (Figure 1), and extremities (Figure 2). Some lesions appeared fluid-filled.
Figure 1. Skin findings.
Figure 2. Skin findings.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 12,000 cells/mm³, platelets 12,000/mm³, lipase 84 U/L, amylase 700 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (ASP, SGOT) 7700 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT) 2424 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 5552 U/L, total bilirubin 4.6 mg/dL, and direct bilirubin 4.1 mg/dL. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a distended gallbladder; the renal allograft was without apparent abnormality.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) of a specimen obtained from a papule was strongly positive for varicella zoster virus (VZV). Testing for cytomegalovirus (CMV) antigen was negative, as were blood cultures.
Treatment and Followup
Ganciclovir was administered intravenously, with resolution of his abdominal pain, liver function tests, and rash.
Discussion
Disseminated varicella zoster infection occurs more frequently in immunocompromised hosts. Visceral involvement, including pneumonitis, hepatitis, and meningoencephalitis, may occur. Despite widespread involvement, disseminated herpes zoster is rarely fatal.
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated varicella zoster virus (VZV).
References
Fehr, T., Bossart, W., Wahl, C., and Binswanger, U. (2002). Disseminated varicella infection in adult renal allograft recipients: four cases and a review of the literature. Transplantation 73, 608-611.
PMID:11889440(PubMed abstract)
