History of Present Illness
2007 April Featured Case Summary: A man with HIV infection, shortness of breath and anemia.
A man in his thirties, with a history of untreated human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection for greater than ten years, presented to the emergency department with shortness of breath, weakness and fatigue. The CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count was 33 cells/mm³, the hematocrit 14.4%, mean corpuscular volume of 84.4 um³, reticulocyte count of 0.3%, and red cell distribution width of 13.4. Packed red blood cells were transfused. He was admitted to the hospital.
Past Medical History
His past medical history included HIV infection, recurrent giardiasis, oral thrush, cytomegalovirus (CMV) viremia, Hepatitis B virus and Hepatitis C virus infections, and herpes zoster. Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) had been grown from his sputum and stool. He was not allergic to medications and had normal levels of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) at baseline.
Medications
He did not take any medications on a regular basis.
Allergies
He was not allergic to medications.
Social History
The patient did not have a fixed residence.
Epidemiological History
He lived in New England and traveled occasionally to New York. He had sex with both men and women, smoked cigarettes, drank alcohol and used intravenous drugs occasionally.
Physical Examination
The physical examination was normal. Rectal exam was refused.
Studies
The hematocrit was 14.4%, mean corpuscular volume of 84.4 um³, reticulocyte count of 0.3%, and red cell distribution width of 13.4. The CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count was 33 cells/mm³. The white cell count was 2,190 cells/mm³ (64% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 4% bands, 14% lymphocytes, 4% atypical lymphocytes, 10% monocytes, and 4% eosinophils), and platelets 439,000/mm³. The iron level was 160 ug/dL (reference range 40-159 ug/dL), increased from 11 ug/dL one year before; transferrin 135 ug/dL (150-450 ug/dL) and ferritin 531 ug/dL (10-345 ug/dL). The serum levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), folate and vitamin B-12 were normal, and haptoglobin was elevated. Erythropoietin was 2,185 mU/mL (4.1 – 19.5 mU/mL). Urine histoplasma antigen was negative.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was transfused and later left the hospital against medical advice, without completion of his evaluation. He was lost to follow-up for approximately 18 months, when he presented again to the emergency room with shortness of breath. The hematocrit was 10.8%. He was re-admitted and blood was transfused. A bone marrow biopsy was performed; hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) staining of the biopsy is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. H and E stain of a bone marrow biopsy.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A bone marrow biopsy revealed numerous immature erythroid forms with viral nuclear inclusions (Figure 2). Maturing erythroid elements were moderately to markedly decreased. Myeloid elements, including interstitial and perivascular plasma cells and megakaryocytes were increased. Multiple non-paratrabecular lymphoplasmacytic aggregates comprised approximately 20% of the marrow cellularity and about 15% of the intertrabecular space. Hemosiderin was present. Erythroid elements and bare nuclei with intranuclear inclusions were present, consistent with parvovirus infection. No micro-organisms were seen on pathological examination of the specimens with special stains, including acid fast and silver stains.
Serum polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for parvovirus B19 DNA was positive, and parvovirus immunoglobulin (Ig) M and IgG antibodies were negative.
Figure 2. H and E stain of marrow, showing viral inclusion bodies (arrows).
Treatment and Followup
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was administered. Over the next year, serum repeatedly tested positive for parvovirus DNA. The patient was non-adherent to his HIV treatment and died the following year of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.
Discussion
In immunocompetent persons, parvovirus infection is largely asymptomatic, with its major manifestation in healthy children being rash that starts on the face and then moves to the trunk and extremities. In healthy adults, the major recognized clinical manifestation is inflammatory arthritis. Joints of the hands, ankles, knees and wrists can become symmetrically inflamed. This usually resolves within a few weeks to months and there is no joint destruction. In pregnant women, however, acute infection can result in abortion or in hydrops fetalis.
Experimental parvovirus infection of adults revealed that viremia was detectable about one week after inoculation and lasted up to seven days. Viremia was associated with low-grade fever, chills, myalgias and headache; parvovirus B19 was detectable in the upper respiratory tract during the same time span, suggesting a route of transmission. Reticulocyte count dropped precipitously to undetectable levels in peripheral blood, and mature erythrocytes, lymphocytes, granulocytes and platelets all showed a downward trend. Parvovirus B19 IgM developed about 8-12 days after inoculation. This study showed that persons with low pre-existing IgG titers can develop transient viremia with re-inoculation. After the clearance of viremia, new symptoms developed including rash, arthralgias and arthritis lasting several days, that are thought to be immune-mediated [Anderson et al 1985].
In persons who are immunosuppressed and cannot mount an effective IgG response, parvovirus can become a chronic infection causing anemia and sometimes affecting other cell lines. It has been described in patients with advanced HIV-disease, those with hematologic malignancies, as well as in persons on immune suppression following organ transplantation. Lack of immunoglobulin permits the chronicity of the infection: patients treated with IVIG can achieve remission in their anemia (and notably can also develop the symptoms thought to be immune-related, rash, arthralgias and arthritis). It is essential to recognize that IVIG does not always eliminate viremia. Retreatment on a monthly basis has been recommended in these cases along with the reversal of immune suppression when possible. Erythropoietin has not been useful in the treatment of chronic Parvovirus infection in HIV-infected patients, and has even been reported to exacerbate the clinical manifestations of parvovirus infection in one HIV positive patient [Borkowski et al 2000].
Diagnosis is usually clinical, but can be confirmed with serology. Those who are immunosuppressed and have chronic parvovirus infection may not have antibodies against the virus. In these cases, diagnosis is by serum PCR for viral DNA or by bone marrow biopsy.
In this patient, the findings on the bone marrow are characteristic of immunosuppressed patients with chronic parvovirus B19 infection [Crook et al 2000]. This cohort of patients had bone marrow biopsy findings identical to those seen in the current specimen, consisting of numerous erythroblasts with viral inclusions and a persistent population of maturing erythroid precursors. These findings differ from those seen in immunocompetent patients, in whom acute parvovirus infection is typically associated with transient red cell aplasia. As a result, erythroblasts with viral inclusions are rarely seen in immunocompetent patients.
Although the patient was given intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), the recommended treatment for chronic parvovirus B19 infection, this can be little more than a temporizing measure. Cure is sometimes only achieved with some measure of immune restoration.
Final Diagnosis
Chronic parvovirus B19 infection in a patient with HIV infection and AIDS.
References
Anderson, M.J., Higgins, P.G., Davis, L.R., Willman, J.S., Jones, S.E., Kidd, I.M., Pattison, J.R., and Tyrrell, D.A. (1985). Experimental parvoviral infection in humans. J Infect Dis 152, 257-265.
PMID:2993431(PubMed abstract) Borkowski, J., Amrikachi, M., and Hudnall, S.D. (2000). Fulminant parvovirus infection following erythropoietin treatment in a patient with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Arch Pathol Lab Med 124, 441-445.
PMID:10705404(PubMed abstract) Crook, T.W., Rogers, B.B., McFarland, R.D., Kroft, S.H., Muretto, P., Hernandez, J.A., Latimer, M.J., and McKenna, R.W. (2000). Unusual bone marrow manifestations of parvovirus B19 infection in immunocompromised patients. Hum Pathol 31, 161-168.
PMID:10685629(PubMed abstract)
Anderson, M.J., Higgins, P.G., Davis, L.R., Willman, J.S., Jones, S.E., Kidd, I.M., Pattison, J.R., and Tyrrell, D.A. (1985). Experimental parvoviral infection in humans. J Infect Dis 152, 257-265.
PMID:2993431(PubMed abstract)
Borkowski, J., Amrikachi, M., and Hudnall, S.D. (2000). Fulminant parvovirus infection following erythropoietin treatment in a patient with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Arch Pathol Lab Med 124, 441-445.
PMID:10705404(PubMed abstract)
Crook, T.W., Rogers, B.B., McFarland, R.D., Kroft, S.H., Muretto, P., Hernandez, J.A., Latimer, M.J., and McKenna, R.W. (2000). Unusual bone marrow manifestations of parvovirus B19 infection in immunocompromised patients. Hum Pathol 31, 161-168.
PMID:10685629(PubMed abstract)
