History of Present Illness
Summary: A man with an abnormal finding after defecation.
A man in his thirties presented after finding an abnormality in the toilet bowl after a bowel movement. He denied abdominal pain, fevers, chills, obstipation, constipation or diarrhea.
Past Medical History
None.
Epidemiological History
The patient had lived in Africa for several years during his childhood, departing over ten years earlier. While in Africa, he lived in major cities and occasionally visited remote areas.
Physical Examination
The physical examination was normal.
Studies
Images of the findings are shown in Figures 1 and 2. The finding measured 12 inches in length.
Figure 1. Finding after defecation.
Figure 2. Detail of Figure 1.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Examination revealed a gravid female nematode, Ascaris.
Treatment and Followup
After the identification of the nematode, the patient was treated with one dose of albendazole. He was advised to return to his primary care physician in 1-2 weeks for repeat stool evaluation for ova and parasites to confirm clearance. If ova are found, one additional treatment would be considered.
Discussion
Ascariasis is the most common helminthic infection in the world. More than one billion people are estimated to be infected with this helminth. The most common route of transmission is through contamination of food and water by ova contained in the soil. Once ingested, the eggs hatch and small larvae penetrate the small intestine and travel to the lung where they are coughed up and re-ingested. The adult worms establish themselves in the jejunum where they can live for over a decade. Eosinophilia is not a feature of chronic infection with ascariasis, yet can sometimes be found in early infection, during the the tissue-migratory phase.
Most infections with Ascaris are asymptomatic, but may be complicated by intestinal obstruction, cholangitis, and pancreatitis. A single dose of albendazole is the preferred agent for therapy. It is important to remember that individuals may be infected with multiple parasites, and ova and parasite tests should be sent to rule out concurrent infections.
Final Diagnosis
Ascariasis.
References
Dold, C., and Holland, C.V. (2011). Ascaris and ascariasis. Microbes Infect 13, 632-637.
PMID:20934531(PubMed abstract) Khuroo, M.S. (1996). Ascariasis. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 25, 553-577.
PMID:8863040(PubMed abstract)
Dold, C., and Holland, C.V. (2011). Ascaris and ascariasis. Microbes Infect 13, 632-637.
PMID:20934531(PubMed abstract)
Khuroo, M.S. (1996). Ascariasis. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 25, 553-577.
PMID:8863040(PubMed abstract)
