History of Present Illness
2011 May-June Featured Case Summary: A man with pain in the right leg.
A man in his forties was admitted to the hospital because of pain and swelling in the right leg.
Approximately 2 months before admission, a sharp pain developed in his right leg, which he initially attributed to a muscle strain. During the next 2-3 weeks, the pain increased in severity, followed by swelling of the right lower leg and ankle. The pain was localized, non-radiating, and eventually disturbed his sleep and gait.
Approximately four weeks before admission, he went to the emergency department of another hospital; a radiograph of the right lower leg was performed, which was thought to show a lytic lesion of the distal tibia. He was referred to an orthopedist, and two weeks later, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), performed with the administration of gadolinium, showed a tibial lesion with no changes in the cortex or evidence of fracture; the study was thought to be possibly consistent with a cyst. Ibuprofen and acetaminophen-oxycodone were administered as needed for pain, without improvement. He was referred to another orthopedist at a tertiary medical center for further evaluation, and seen 12 days later.
He reported weight loss of 5 pounds (2.2 kg) during the previous 5 months, without history of trauma, fevers, chills, gastrointestinal or urinary symptoms, or other systemic symptoms.
Past Medical History
He had hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. Five months before presentation, approximately 3 months before the onset of pain, he had had dental surgery, including treatment of dental caries and a root canal. He did not take any antibiotics and had not noted any complications. Several years before, he had had a partial nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma and had been disease-free thereafter. Ten years before, cervical spine surgery for disc herniation was performed.
He had no drug allergies.
Medications
Medications included simvastatin and metoprolol, as well as ibuprofen and acetaminophen-oxycodone as needed for pain.
Family History
His paternal grandfather and mother had diabetes mellitus.
Social History
He was married, lived with his wife and children. He drank alcohol in moderation, had smoked cigarettes until several months before admission, and did not use illicit drugs.
Epidemiological History
He worked in a medical facility. He had traveled to California 4 years before and Mexico decades earlier. He owned a pet cockatiel.
Physical Examination
On examination, the body mass index was 30.1 kg/m²; the right leg was swollen below the knee, with firm and slightly erythematous skin, and warm, pitting edema locally. The distal portion of the right tibia was tender to deep palpation. Passive rotation of the hips, hip flexor and quadriceps muscle strength, sensation and neurovascular tone, as well as the remainder of the examination, were normal.
Studies
The white cell count was 9300 cells/mm³ (reference range 4500-11,000), with 67% neutrophils, 25% lymphocytes, 6% monocytes, 1% eosinophils and 1% basophils. The hematocrit was 38.6% (ref. 41.0-53.0, in men), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 25 mm per hour (ref 0-11). The serum level of glucose was 297 mg/dl (ref. 70-110) and C-reactive protein (CRP) 19.8 mg/L (ref. less than 8.0); other tests including electrolytes, total protein, albumin, and globulin and tests of renal and liver function, were normal.
Radiographs of the right lower leg, shown in Figures 1 and 2, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the tibia (Figure 3) were reviewed.
Figure 1. Radiograph of lower leg.
Figure 2. Radiograph of the lower leg.
Figure 3. MRI of the tibia, T2-weighted.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Two days later, the patient was admitted to the hospital. The blood pressure was 152/92 mm Hg; other vital signs were normal and the examination was unchanged. An open distal tibia biopsy with irrigation and drainage was performed. Purulent material (approximately 30cc) was aspirated after entering the bone; gram stain of the specimen is shown in Figure 4 (image courtesy of JiYeon Kim, MD). Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen demonstrated features of acute and chronic osteomyelitis.
Figure 4. Gram stain of the specimen.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Gram stain of the specimen demonstrated abundant polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and rare gram-negative rods (Figure 4). Culture of the specimen grew moderate-to-abundant gray, glistening colonies on blood agar and translucent, lactose-negative colonies on MacConkey agar (Figures 5 and 6 respectively), which were identified as Salmonella group B that was susceptible to all antimicrobials tested. No other organisms (including mycobacteria, fungi, or other bacteria) were isolated by stain or culture. The organism was later determined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to be serotype S. Heidelberg.
Urinalysis demonstrated 2+ glucose and was otherwise normal. The organism was not recovered from cultures of the blood, urine or stool. Testing for human immunodeficiency virus was negative.
Figure 5. Culture of the specimen on blood agar plate.
Figure 6. Culture of the specimen on MacConkey agar plate.
Treatment and Followup
The Salmonella organism isolated was susceptible to quinolones and nalidixic acid. The patient was initially treated with broad spectrum antimicrobials; when the organism was identified, ceftriaxone was administered intravenously, followed by oral ciprofloxacin on discharge.
The source of the Salmonella infection was not determined.
While hospitalized, a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus was made. The level of hemoglobin A1c was 10.50% (ref 3.80-6.40). Insulin was administered, followed by metformin, in addition to an American Diabetes Association (ADA) diet.
One month later, he was pain-free, and able to bear weight while wearing a bivalve cast when walking. The ESR was 11 mm/hr and CRP 2.1 mg/L. A course of ciprofloxacin of least 3 months' duration was planned.
Discussion
A diagnosis of osteomyelitis of the distal tibia was strongly considered in this patient with a sub-acute clinical presentation that included localized pain and swelling of the distal leg, laboratory testing with elevation of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein (suggestive of inflammation), and plain radiographs and MRI with gadolinium that revealed a localized lesion with T2-weighted enhancement. The diagnosis was confirmed, and metastatic carcinoma excluded, by pathological and microbiological examination of tissue obtained by surgical aspiration and debridement of the tibia; the bone culture grew Salmonella enterica serotype Heidelberg. Following the identification, antimicrobial treatment was guided by results of susceptibility testing of the organism.
Staphylococcus species, particularly S. aureus and coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, cause greater than 50% of cases of osteomyelitis. However, the gram stain of this patient's aspirate did not demonstrate gram-positive cocci but, rather, showed gram-negative bacilli. Gram-negative causes of osteomyelitis include Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Pseudomonas, and Serratia, and acid-fast bacilli such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis (which may be gram-variable). Salmonella subspecies, also gram-negative bacilli, are identified in less than 5% of osteomyelitis cases [Berbari et al. 2009], except in the subset of patients with sickle cell disease, in whom Salmonella, with Staphylococcus, is one of the two most frequent causes of osteomyelitis [Burnett et al. 1998].
The clinical presentation of osteomyelitis and mechanism of infection may vary significantly among patients. This patient’s history did not implicate local penetrating trauma and there was no hardware in the affected bone to serve as a nidus for bacteria, nor was the patient’s sub-acute course and examination (with deep symptomatic discomfort preceding the appearance of superficial erythema) suggestive of contiguous spread of infection. The most likely mechanism of infection was thought to be hematogenous seeding; however, the exact source of this patient’s organism, Salmonella Heidelberg, remained unclear. Exposures to contaminated food, an unrecognized gastrointestinal illness or exposure to an infected bird are possible source considerations. At the time of his infection, contamination of peanut butter with Salmonella had recently been identified, but S. Heidelberg was not the subspecies implicated. S. Heidelberg has been cultured from multiple food sources including chickens and turkeys [Hoelzer et al. 2011] and swine [Han et al 2011] and these could have been potential sources of the infection. Several bird populations, including pet birds such as parakeets and cockatoos, have been shown to harbor Salmonella (infected birds may be asymptomatic or may have lethal disease) [Hoelzer et al. 2011]. Of the Salmonella subspecies, S. Heidelberg has been shown to cause more invasive disease than some of the others [Jones et al. 2008].
Osteomyelitis occurs more commonly in patients who are immunocompromised. The contributing or predisposing illnesses that cause osteomyelitis may be systemic - including (but not limited to) malignancy, renal or hepatic failure, pediatric or geriatric ages or diabetes mellitus - or factors that lead to decreased local immunity such as radiation fibrosis, scarring, lymphedema, hypoxia or vascular compromise. Most cases of diabetes-related osteomyelitis affect the foot, and are associated with small vessel disease and diabetic neuropathy. Salmonella osteomyelitis of a long bone has been reported as the presenting illness of non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus [Gondusky et al. 2009], as seen in this case.
Final Diagnosis
Osteomyelitis of the tibia caused by Salmonella enterica serotype Heidelberg in a patient with newly-diagnosed diabetes mellitus.
References
Berbari EF, S.J., Osmon DR (2009). In Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases (Elsevier Churchill Livingstone) Burnett, M.W., Bass, J.W., and Cook, B.A. (1998). Etiology of osteomyelitis complicating sickle cell disease. Pediatrics 101, 296-297.
PMID:9445507(PubMed abstract) Gondusky, J.S., Gondusky, C.J., and Helmers, S.W. (2009). Salmonella osteomyelitis in new-onset diabetes mellitus. Orthopedics 32.
PMID:19750996(PubMed abstract) Han, J., David, D.E., Deck, J., Lynne, A.M., Kaldhone, P., Nayak, R., Stefanova, R., and Foley, S.L. (2011). Comparison of Salmonella enterica serovar Heidelberg isolates from human patients with those from animal and food sources. J Clin Microbiol 49, 1130-1133.
PMID:21177888(PubMed abstract) Hoelzer, K., Moreno Switt, A.I., and Wiedmann, M. (2011). Animal contact as a source of human non-typhoidal salmonellosis. Vet Res 42, 34.
PMID:21324103(PubMed abstract) Jones, T.F., Ingram, L.A., Cieslak, P.R., Vugia, D.J., Tobin-D'Angelo, M., Hurd, S., Medus, C., Cronquist, A., and Angulo, F.J. (2008). Salmonellosis outcomes differ substantially by serotype. J Infect Dis 198, 109-114.
PMID:18462137(PubMed abstract)
Berbari EF, S.J., Osmon DR (2009). In Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases (Elsevier Churchill Livingstone)
Burnett, M.W., Bass, J.W., and Cook, B.A. (1998). Etiology of osteomyelitis complicating sickle cell disease. Pediatrics 101, 296-297.
PMID:9445507(PubMed abstract)
Gondusky, J.S., Gondusky, C.J., and Helmers, S.W. (2009). Salmonella osteomyelitis in new-onset diabetes mellitus. Orthopedics 32.
PMID:19750996(PubMed abstract)
Han, J., David, D.E., Deck, J., Lynne, A.M., Kaldhone, P., Nayak, R., Stefanova, R., and Foley, S.L. (2011). Comparison of Salmonella enterica serovar Heidelberg isolates from human patients with those from animal and food sources. J Clin Microbiol 49, 1130-1133.
PMID:21177888(PubMed abstract)
Hoelzer, K., Moreno Switt, A.I., and Wiedmann, M. (2011). Animal contact as a source of human non-typhoidal salmonellosis. Vet Res 42, 34.
PMID:21324103(PubMed abstract)
Jones, T.F., Ingram, L.A., Cieslak, P.R., Vugia, D.J., Tobin-D'Angelo, M., Hurd, S., Medus, C., Cronquist, A., and Angulo, F.J. (2008). Salmonellosis outcomes differ substantially by serotype. J Infect Dis 198, 109-114.
PMID:18462137(PubMed abstract)
