History of Present Illness
IDSA 2004 Summary: A man with HIV presented with productive cough and fever.
A man in his fifties had been infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) for twenty years. Ten days before presentation, he was admitted to another hospital with a productive cough and fever. Community-acquired pneumonia was diagnosed and ceftriaxone and azithromycin were administered.
Past Medical History
The patient was HIV-positive and had acquired immunodefiency syndrome (AIDS). Three weeks before admission, his CD4 T-lymphocyte count was 35 cells/mm³, and the level of HIV-RNA 250,000 copies per milliliter. The patient had failed highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) several times, possibly due to non-adherence. He had had Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) in the past but was not on prophylaxis therapy at the time of admission.
Epidemiological History
The patient lived in the Southwestern United States.
Physical Examination
He was a mildly cachectic man in no apparent distress. The temperature was 38.2°C (100.8°F), blood pressure 120/60 mm Hg, pulse 90 beats per minute and respirations 26 breaths per minute. There was non-tender adenopathy in the cervical, axillary and inguinal regions. No thrush was seen. Dry rales were heard in the left upper posterior lung fields. No murmurs, abdominal pain, hepatosplenomegaly, skin lesions or focal neurological findings were noted.
Studies
The hematocrit was 38%, white blood cells 7,600/mm³, with 12% lymphocytes, 1% eosinophils and no bands.
Chest radiography revealed a streaky infiltrate in the left upper lobe (Figures 1 and 2). Gram staining of a sputum specimen revealed scattered polymorphonuclear leukocytes, without significant organisms. Blood and sputum cultures were obtained.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph.
Figure 2. Lateral chest radiograph.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient declined bronchoscopy, lymph node biopsy or further evaluation. His condition markedly deteriorated and vital signs became unstable. He was diagnosed with severe sepsis syndrome and died in the Intensive Care Unit.
Five days after admission, blood and sputum cultures drawn on admission grew the same organism.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The blood and sputum cultures grew Coccidioides immitis.
Treatment and Followup
Discussion
Final Diagnosis
Coccidioidomycosis caused by Coccidioides immitis in a patient with HIV and AIDS.
References
