History of Present Illness
Summary: An elderly man with a headache, confusion and history of falling.
An elderly man presented with headache, increasing confusion, diaphoresis and multiple falling episodes during the previous day. There was no history of witnessed head trauma, seizure activity, incontinence, fever, chills, or sinus or ear pain.
Past Medical History
He had a history of diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease, and lower extremity ulcers.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared disoriented and lethargic, was moving all extremities and having rigors. The blood pressure 93/49 mm Hg, pulse 86 beats per minute and respirations 26 per minute. The temperature was initially normal, but subsequently rose to 103.1°F (39.5°C) soon after admission. There were equally reactive pupils, a dry oropharynx, and moderate neck stiffness. The lungs were clear and there was a 2/6 systolic murmur heard best at the left lower sternal border. The abdomen was normal. The right hand was erythematous and warm. There was erythema in a bilateral pre-tibial distribution, and a shallow right foot ulcer (2 cm by 3 cm) was present. On neurologic examination, he was lethargic and nonverbal, with intact reflexes. The Babinski reflex was equivocal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 8,800 cells/mm³ (39% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 46% bands, 5% lymphocytes, 8% monocytes, and 2 metamyelocytes.) Toxic granulations and Dohle bodies were seen on the peripheral smear. The hematocrit was 34.6% and the platelets were 64,000/mm³. The sodium was 132 mmol/L, urea nitrogen 64 mg/dL, and creatinine 2.3 mg/dL.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head was performed without contrast and showed small vessel ischemic changes, and a right subdural collection consistent with a hygroma (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Head CT scan without contrast.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A lumbar puncture was performed and the cerebrospinal fluid revealed 129 white blood cells/mm³ (89% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 3% bands), 3420 red cells/mm³, protein 298 mg/dL, and glucose 72 mg/dL. The gram stain showed few white blood cells and no organisms.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Within twelve hours, blood cultures that had been sent from the Emergency Room grew gram-positive cocci in pairs, chains, and clusters. These were identified as methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus and group G Streptococcus.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head with gadolinium was performed and revealed a right subdural collection with enhancement that was suggestive of a subdural empyema. A right parietofrontal infarct was also identified. (See Figures 2 and 3.)
Figure 2. Head MRI scan.
Figure 3. Head MRI scan with gadolinium.
Treatment and Followup
The patient's course was complicated by hypotension, atrial arrhythmias, myocardial infarction and seizure activity. Intravenous nafcillin was administered and, when his condition continued to deteriorate, ceftriaxone and metronidazole were added. Neurosurgical evacuation of the right subdural collection was performed, and fifteen cubic centimeters of purulent material was drained. Intra-operative gram stain showed gram-positive cocci in clusters. Cultures were sterile. (Of note, the patient had been on antibiotics for several days prior to surgery). Transesophageal echocardiography did not reveal vegetations.
The patient's course was notable for development of a diffuse erythematous rash. Phenytoin, ceftriaxone, nafcillin and metronidazole were stopped and valproic acid, vancomycin and chloramphenicol were administered. He initally improved, but subsequently his clinical condition worsened with development of recurrent fever and hypotension. Despite all efforts, the patient died one month after initial presentation.
Discussion
The dura mater and arachnoid membrane enclose a potential subdural space, traversed by numerous small veins. Infection may spread to this space by direct extension (e.g. from sinus or middle ear disease) or, less commonly, by metastatic infection. In adults, cranial subdural empyemas most commonly follow neurosurgery. Septic thrombosis of veins within the empyema may cause venous infarction.
The diagnosis of cranial subdural empyema should be suspected in a patient with meningeal signs and focal neurologic deficit.
Final Diagnosis
Cranial subdural empyema, with evidence of methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus and group G Streptococcus infection.
References
Bernardini, G.L. (2004). Diagnosis and management of brain abscess and subdural empyema. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 4, 448-456.
PMID:15509445(PubMed abstract) Greenlee, J.E. (2003). Subdural Empyema. Curr Treat Options Neurol 5, 13-22.
PMID:12521560(PubMed abstract)
Bernardini, G.L. (2004). Diagnosis and management of brain abscess and subdural empyema. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 4, 448-456.
PMID:15509445(PubMed abstract)
Greenlee, J.E. (2003). Subdural Empyema. Curr Treat Options Neurol 5, 13-22.
PMID:12521560(PubMed abstract)
