History of Present Illness
2010 September-October Featured Case Summary: A woman with ulcerations of the right hand and left leg.
A woman in her sixties developed ulcerations on the right hand and left leg.
Approximately one week before admission, she sustained a friction injury when a dog leash wrapped around her left leg. Four days before admission, she burned the second finger of her right hand on a hot oven; a blister formed over the site of the burn. The next day, the blister opened and she noted purulent discharge. She administered hydrogen peroxide and an over-the-counter triple antibiotic ointment locally, and applied gauze to the lesions. Later, while at a beach on the Atlantic Ocean, the bandages over her wounds became wet.
One day before admission, she was seen at a health center because of progressive enlargement of the wounds. Clindamycin was administered intravenously and then orally, for a total of 4 doses, without improvement. Pain radiated from the right hand to her wrist, with local paresthesias around the finger lesion. She reported chills, but denied fevers, erythematous streaking, chest pain, or respiratory, gastrointestinal or urinary symptoms. She was referred to the burn unit of a hospital.
Past Medical History
She had a history of chronic obstructive lung disease, hyperlipidemia and vitamin B12 deficiency. She had been obese in the past, and had had Roux-en-y gastric bypass surgery 2 years before, after which she had lost weight. Laboratory testing prior to surgery had revealed anti-cardiolipin immunoglobulin G antibodies (26.4 gpl with reference range 1-15), and a heterozygous mutation for the prothrombin gene mutation G20210A. Routine screening evaluations for malignancy, including mammogram, gynecologic examination and colonoscopy, had been negative within the previous year.
Medications
Clindamycin had been administered, as above. Her tetanus immunization was up-to-date.
Allergies
She was right-handed. She lived alone in coastal New England and worked in healthcare with patients. She had stopped smoking several years earlier, and did not drink alcohol or use illicit drugs. She had no pets and had not traveled recently. Her mother had died of a stroke and her father had had a pulmonary embolus after a fall.
Epidemiological History
She was right-handed. She lived alone in coastal New England and worked in healthcare with patients. She had stopped smoking several years earlier, and did not drink alcohol or use illicit drugs. She had no pets and had not traveled recently. Her mother had died of a stroke and her father had had a pulmonary embolus after a fall.
Physical Examination
The blood pressure was 132/68 mm Hg, pulse 90 beats per minute, temperature 96.6°F (35.9°C) and respirations 18 breaths per minute, with oxygen saturation 100% while breathing room air. The right index finger was swollen, with wounds consistent with second degree burns over the dorsal aspect of the proximal phalanx (3 cm in length), associated with purulent discharge, and a tender blister over the lateral middle phalanx (1 cm in diameter). The compartments were soft, with intact neurovascular function, and no tendons were visible. Limitation of flexion of the right finger was thought to be secondary to swelling; range-of-motion was otherwise normal. There were two lesions on the left lateral leg (3 cm diameter and 2 cm diameter), without purulent discharge. The leg lesions were tender to palpation with trace foot edema. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white cell count was 15,400 cells per cubic millimeter (reference range 4500-11,000) with 81% leukocytes, 13% lymphocytes, 5% monocytes, and 1% eosinophils. The level of serum carbon dioxide was 19.2 mmol/L (ref. 23.0-31.9) and C-reactive protein was 148.2 mg/L (ref. less than 8.0, for inflammation). Other screening test results, including electrolytes and tests of renal function and coagulation, were normal.
A radiograph of the right hand (Figure 1) showed diffuse soft tissue thickening of the second digit, without evidence of a lucent lesion to suggest osteomyelitis or an acute osseous injury.
Figure 1. Radiograph of the right hand, on admission.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Vancomycin was administered in the emergency department; however, pain developed acutely and the infusion was stopped. Ampicillin-sulbactam was then administered, without improvement. During the next 2 days, new blistering lesions developed on the left index finger and hand.
On the 3rd day, debridement of the lesions was performed in the operating room, and infectious disease specialists were consulted. On examination, the lesions were well-demarcated (Figures 2 and 3, images provided by Raj M. Vyas, MD). There was swollen and inflamed tissue associated with granulation and scant purulence in the wounds, without evidence of eschar. Specimens from of the wounds, examined by gram stains, showed abundant leukocytes and mononuclear cells (Figure 4, image provided by John Branda MD). Rare gram positive cocci in pairs were seen on gram stain of a specimen from the left index finger; other specimens showed no organisms and a fungal wet prep was negative.
Figure 2. Physical findings on right hand, intra-operative.
Figure 3. Physical findings on left ankle, intra-operative.
Figure 4. Gram stain of specimen.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Cultures of the lesion on the left leg and right hand, obtained on admission, grew rare methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus colonies; the culture of the leg also grew Enterococcus in the thioglycollate broth tube, which was thought to be a contaminant. Cultures of the leg and right hand obtained in the operating room were sterile; the culture of the left index finger grew rare methicillin-susceptible S. aureus and methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative Staphylococcus. All other wound cultures, including for fungi and mycobacteria, were sterile, as were blood cultures. Testing for 1, 3 beta D glucan was negative. Indirect immunofluorescence testing for anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies (ANCA), serum protein electrophoresis and testing for lupus anticoagulant and syphilis were also negative. The level of anticardiolipin IgG was 21.1 gpl (ref 1-15).
Histopathological examination of the biopsied specimens with hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stains are shown in Figures 5 through 8 (images provided by Lyn Duncan MD and Madelyn Lew MD), and revealed normal tissue, as well as an intraepidermal blister, a dense dermal acute inflammatory infiltrate and tissue necrosis. The findings were thought to be consistent with pyoderma gangrenosum, in the appropriate clinical setting.
Figure 5. H and E stain of biopsy, showing normal skin.
Figure 6. H and E stain of skin, with a dense acute inflammatory infiltrate and dermal necrosis.
Figure 7. H and E stain of skin, with epidermal necrosis and an intraepidermal blister.
Figure 8. H and E stain, with necrosis and acute inflammation.
Treatment and Followup
The patient initially received broad spectrum antibiotics, including vancomycin, ciprofloxacin and metronidazole, pending the culture results. Prednisone (70 mg daily) was administered, with topical antimicrobial ointment and local wound care. On the 2nd post-operative day, the parenteral antibiotics were stopped. Physical findings of the lesions are shown (Figures 9 and 10, images provided by Michael Calderwood, MD). The patient was discharged, on the 3rd post-operative day.
Two weeks later, at follow-up, the lesions on the hands and the left leg had markedly improved. Continued Dermatology follow-up, with a slow taper of prednisone and possible administration of a steroid-sparing agent, was planned.
Figure 9. Physical findings, post-operatively.
Figure 10. Physical findings, post-operatively.
Discussion
Pyoderma gangrenosum is an idiopathic inflammatory disease that is often mistaken for an infectious process. Diagnosis of this condition is based upon clinical history, pathology, and exclusion of other diseases that cause erosive or ulcerative skin lesions. While an underlying systemic disease such as inflammatory bowel disease, myeloproliferative disorder, or inflammatory arthritis is found in approximately 50% of cases of pyoderma gangrenosum, this disease has also been associated with trauma (including burns) and surgery [Callen and Jackson 2007, Ouzzani et al. 2007, Kalu and Williams 2007]. It is important to consider this disease in patients with non-healing wounds and obtain early dermatologic consultation whenever possible, because surgical intervention, including debridement, may exacerbate pyoderma gangrenosum and lead to worsening ulceration.
In this patient, a broad differential was considered, including several possible infections. The rare gram positive cocci seen on the gram stain of the specimen from the left index finger raised the possibility of an aggressive skin and soft tissue infection caused by Staphylococcus aureus; however, only rare S. aureus were isolated. The patient’s possible exposure to brackish ocean water and the severity of the skin and soft tissue lesions in the setting of prior tissue injury raised the possibility of more atypical infections caused by Aeromonas, Vibrio vulnificus and Mycobacterium marinum. However, results of gram staining and cultures did not suggest either Aeromonas or V. vulnificus. Similarly, infection by M. marinum, with an incubation period typically of 2-4 weeks, was also thought unlikely. Finally, the possibility of a deep fungal infection or ecthyma gangrensum secondary to Pseudomonas aeruginosa were considered, but were not supported by microbiologic staining or culture data. Other non-infectious causes, including vasculitis (polyarteritis nodosa, vasculitis associated with antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and mixed cryoglobulinemia) as well as thrombophilic states (antiphospholipid antibody syndrome and Factor V Leiden mutation) should be considered [Callen and Jackson 2007].
In this case, a diagnosis of pyoderma gangrenosum was made after exclusion of other conditions; this diagnosis was also supported by the development of new ulcerations on the left hand at the site of a peripheral intravenous line. The patient's elevated anticardiolipin IgG and heterozygous mutation for the prothrombin gene mutation G20210A may have been contributing factors.
While there is no published algorithm for the treatment of pyoderma gangrenosum, the literature suggests the use of prolonged systemic glucocorticoid therapy; the ulcers often require months to years to resolve. A subset of patients requires the use of other immunomodulators (e.g. cyclosporine, thalidomide, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha blockers such as infliximab) [Miller et al. 2010]. One analysis that reviewed time to remission found that patients with pyoderma gangrenosum typically required a mean of 11.5 months of treatment to achieve remission [Bennett et al. 2000]. Presently, the goal of treatment is to obtain initial rapid control with corticosteroids, and administer a concomitant steroid-sparing agent in prolonged or recurrent cases to allow for steroid taper.
Final Diagnosis
Pyoderma gangrenosum of the hands and left leg.
References
Bennett, M.L., Jackson, J.M., Jorizzo, J.L., Fleischer, A.B., Jr., White, W.L., and Callen, J.P. (2000). Pyoderma gangrenosum. A comparison of typical and atypical forms with an emphasis on time to remission. Case review of 86 patients from 2 institutions. Medicine (Baltimore) 79, 37-46
PMID:10670408(PubMed abstract) Callen, J.P., and Jackson, J.M. (2007). Pyoderma gangrenosum: an update. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 33, 787-802, vi
PMID:18037117(PubMed abstract) Kalu, P.U., and Williams, G. (2007). Scalding as an unusual cause of pyoderma gangrenosum. Burns 33, 105-108.
PMID:17081694(PubMed abstract) Miller, J., Yentzer, B.A., Clark, A., Jorizzo, J.L., and Feldman, S.R. (2010). Pyoderma gangrenosum: a review and update on new therapies. J Am Acad Dermatol 62, 646-654
PMID:20227580(PubMed abstract) Ouazzani, A., Berthe, J.V., and de Fontaine, S. (2007). Post-surgical pyoderma gangrenosum: a clinical entity. Acta Chir Belg 107, 424-428.
PMID:17966539(PubMed abstract)
Bennett, M.L., Jackson, J.M., Jorizzo, J.L., Fleischer, A.B., Jr., White, W.L., and Callen, J.P. (2000). Pyoderma gangrenosum. A comparison of typical and atypical forms with an emphasis on time to remission. Case review of 86 patients from 2 institutions. Medicine (Baltimore) 79, 37-46
PMID:10670408(PubMed abstract)
Callen, J.P., and Jackson, J.M. (2007). Pyoderma gangrenosum: an update. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 33, 787-802, vi
PMID:18037117(PubMed abstract)
Kalu, P.U., and Williams, G. (2007). Scalding as an unusual cause of pyoderma gangrenosum. Burns 33, 105-108.
PMID:17081694(PubMed abstract)
Miller, J., Yentzer, B.A., Clark, A., Jorizzo, J.L., and Feldman, S.R. (2010). Pyoderma gangrenosum: a review and update on new therapies. J Am Acad Dermatol 62, 646-654
PMID:20227580(PubMed abstract)
Ouazzani, A., Berthe, J.V., and de Fontaine, S. (2007). Post-surgical pyoderma gangrenosum: a clinical entity. Acta Chir Belg 107, 424-428.
PMID:17966539(PubMed abstract)
