History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Summary: An immunocompetent woman with bilateral infiltrates.
A woman was admitted to the hospital because of fever, chills, sore throat, myalgias, periumbilical pain and vomiting, which had begun two days before admission.
One month before admission she was evaluated in an emergency room with diffuse myalgias and dizziness while on diet pills. The pills were stopped and she was discharged home on cyclobenzaprine. Two weeks later, she returned to the emergency room and again reported myalgias, which were not responding to cyclobenzaprine. She was discharged on naproxen and reported symptomatic improvement until two days before admission.
On admission, she reported no cough or shortness of breath. There was no history of fever, night sweats, or weight loss.
Past Medical History
She had no significant past medical history.
Medications
Medications included naproxen as needed.
Epidemiological History
She was from an island in the Caribbean. She had no history of drug or alcohol use. There was no recent travel, exposure to ill persons or known animal exposures.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared ill. The temperature was 104.3°F (40.2°C), blood pressure 104/62 mm Hg, pulse 140 beats per minute, and respirations 20 breaths per minute. There was mild erythema of the conjunctiva. The tonsils were enlarged and a white exudate was noted. There was tender adenopathy in the anterior cervical and submandibular regions, and mild tenderness to palpation in the epigastrium and peirumbilical areas, without guarding or rebound tenderness. The legs were tender to palpation, and the remainder of the exam was normal.
Studies
The hemoglobin was 14.3 g/dL, hematocrit 43.8%, white blood cell count (WBC) 3,400/mm³ (with 63% neutrophils, 26% band forms, 6% lymphocytes, and 2% monocytes), platelets 200,000/mm³, prothrombin time (PT) 17.2 seconds, partial thromboplastin time (PTT) 37 seconds, INR 1.6, sodium 134 mmol/l, potassium 3.8 mmol/l, chloride 98 mmol/l, bicarbonate 20 mmol/l, urea nitrogen 18, creatinine 1.2, glucose 103 mg/dl, bilirubin 4.9 mg/dl (direct 3.1 mg/dl), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 339 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 376 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 164 U/L, amylase 65 U/L, lipase 34 U/L, creatine phosphokinase (CPK) 3193 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 1572 U/L.
The chest radiograph showed bilateral reticulonodular infiltrates (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Chest radiograph.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was treated with clindamycin and cefotaxime initially. On the third hospital day she became afebrile. Her sore throat and abdominal pain resolved. However, the myalgias continued. A tuberculosis skin test (PPD) was positive, with 30 mm induration. Three sputum samples for acid fast bacilli (AFB) were negative.
On the sixth hospital day, she became more hypoxic and required intubation. A bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed and smears were negative for AFB, fungus and Pneumocystis carinii (PCP). Electromyography did not reveal any evidence of acute denervation. Serologic tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibodies and viral load were negative.
The liver function tests increased: AST 985 U/L, ALT 601 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 635 U/L, and direct bilirubin 6.4 mg/dL. The platelet count decreased to 124,000/mm³. The patient had recurrent fevers and a bone marrow biopsy was performed.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A transbronchial biopsy was not performed due to marked desaturation. The bone morrow biopsy showed multiple non-caseating granulomas but no acid fast bacilli (AFB). The sputum and BAL grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis on culture.
Treatment and Followup
Blood, urine and throat cultures were negative for bacteria and fungi. Sputum, urine and throat cultures were negative for virus. The cefotaxime and clindamycin were changed to piperacillin-tazobactam, azithromycin and anti-tuberculosis therapy (isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol). The patient’s condition worsened despite this therapy. She became profoundly acidotic and severely hypoxic with cardiac tachyarrhythmias. She expired on the fourteenth day of the hospitalization.
An autopsy revealed adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and pathologic changes consistent with disseminated tuberculosis involving multiple organs. (Figures 2 through 7).
Figure 2. Heart histopathology.
Figure 3. Lung histopathology.
Figure 4. Liver histopathology.
Figure 5. Ovarian histopathology.
Figure 6. Adrenal histopathology.
Figure 7. Bone marrow.
Discussion
This case describes a very atypical presentation of a fatal case of disseminated tuberculosis. The literature does describe cases of septic shock or sepsis syndrome associated with tuberculosis, termed "sepsis tuberculosis gravissima". These cases have generally occurred in elderly patient or those with AIDS and other chronic illnesses such as lupus. Another unusual presentation of tuberculosis is adult respiratory distress syndrome in association with miliary tuberculosis. The case reports in the literature describing this entity all involve patients with histories of alcohol abuse who were ill for weeks to months prior to diagnosis.
This patient was a young woman with no history of immunocompromise and no medical complaints except for myalgias. Her initial presentation was most consistent with a severe acute viral illness with pharyngitis, conjunctivitis, myositis, hepatitis and pneumonitis. Given the unusual presentation, tuberculosis was not considered likely especially when the sputum and a bronchoalveolar lavage were negative on smear for AFB. It has been noted that the diagnosis of miliary tuberculosis maybe difficult since smears of sputum for acid-fast bacilli may be positive in only 20-40% of patients and the PPD maybe negative in 30-60% of cases. Had her clinical condition permitted a transbronchial biopsy, it is expected that the yield from this procedure would have been higher than from the BAL.
This patient died on her third day of anti-tuberculous therapy and the autopsy was consistent with tuberculosis infection of multiple organs. The literature indicates a very poor survival rate for cases of disseminated tuberculosis associated with septic shock or ARDS. It remains an unproven possibility that a severe viral illness predisposed this patient to fatal disseminated tuberculosis.
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated tuberculosis, caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
References
