History of Present Illness
Summary: A man in his fifties with left facial swelling.
A man in his fifties underwent an allogeneic bone-marrow transplant (ABT) for refractory non-Hodgkin's lymphoma nine months prior to presentation. His transplant was complicated by severe graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) which was treated with steroids, infliximab (remicade), intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), and FK506. Approximately three weeks prior to admission, he noted left facial swelling, in particular periorbital edema, as well as proptosis.
Past Medical History
There was a history of Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, status post allogeneic bone marrow transplant, with graft versus host disease.
Medications
Medications included prednisone and FK506.
Physical Examination
He was afebrile, with mild periorbital edema and quarter-sized hypoesthesia over left cheek. Vision and extraocular movements intact, and the remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
Computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed left ethmoid and maxillary sinusitis, as well as inferior orbital involvement (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Head CT scan.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
He underwent a left maxillary sinus debridement. Pathology revealed chronic inflammation with invasive fungal forms. Hyphae with acute angle branching are seen in Figure 2 and suggest a diagnosis of Aspergillus. Samples grew Aspergillus fumigatus on culture.
Figure 2. Aspergillus fumigatus.
Treatment and Followup
Discussion
Invasive aspergillosis most commonly affects immunocompromised hosts; portal of entry is usually via the lungs or sinuses. Most often, the lung or central nervous system is involved. Treatment is surgical debridement, when possible, as well as antifungal therapy and minimization of immunosuppression. Antifungals with activity against Aspergillus include amphotericin products, as well as more novel therapeutics such as caspofungin and voriconazole.
The clinical presentation of mucormycosis may be indistinguishable from aspergillosis. Invasive aspergillosis is substantially more common, however. On biopsy, Mucor appears as broad based hyphae without septations. Recurrent lymphoma may present as a retroorbital mass, however the associated sinus disease seen in this case would be unusual. Mycobacterium chelonae may cause disseminated infection in immunocompromised patients, but this typically presents with soft tissue nodules.
Final Diagnosis
Invasive aspergillosis, caused by Aspergillus fumigatus, in a patient with Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and status post bone marrow transplant.
References
Coley, S.C., Jager, H.R., Szydlo, R.M., and Goldman, J.M. (1999). CT and MRI manifestations of central nervous system infection following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Clin Radiol 54, 390-397.
PMID:10406341(PubMed abstract) Verschraegen, C.F., van Besien, K.W., Dignani, C., Hester, J.P., Andersson, B.S., and Anaissie, E. (1997). Invasive Aspergillus sinusitis during bone marrow transplantation. Scand J Infect Dis 29, 436-438.
PMID:9360268(PubMed abstract)
Coley, S.C., Jager, H.R., Szydlo, R.M., and Goldman, J.M. (1999). CT and MRI manifestations of central nervous system infection following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Clin Radiol 54, 390-397.
PMID:10406341(PubMed abstract)
Verschraegen, C.F., van Besien, K.W., Dignani, C., Hester, J.P., Andersson, B.S., and Anaissie, E. (1997). Invasive Aspergillus sinusitis during bone marrow transplantation. Scand J Infect Dis 29, 436-438.
PMID:9360268(PubMed abstract)
