History of Present Illness
2008 July Featured Case and Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A man presented in mid-summer with abdominal discomfort and fever.
A man in his sixties was well until one month earlier, when intermittent generalized abdominal discomfort developed, predominantly located in the left lower quadrant and associated with abdominal fullness and decreased appetite. There was no nausea, vomiting or diarrhea. His weight increased 15 pounds (7 kilograms) and he reported his clothing no longer fit him.
One week before admission, he felt flushed and his temperature rose to 103°F (39.4°C). During the next week, fevers recurred daily. He saw his physician and ciprofloxacin was begun for possible diverticulitis. Several days before his evaluation, melena developed. A chest radiograph performed at another hospital was reportedly normal, and computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen, performed without contrast, demonstrated an enlarged prostate and mild diverticulosis with possible diverticulitis. He was admitted to the hospital.
On admission, moxifloxacin and metronidazole were begun. However, his fevers persisted. An infectious disease specialist was consulted and doxycycline added. A blood test for Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever was reportedly negative. During the admission, dyspnea developed, and the platelet count decreased to 50,000 per cubic millimeter, associated with a normocytic anemia and mild elevation of serum transaminases. Cultures of specimens of blood and urine were sterile, and the stool culture was negative for pathogens. On the 4th hospital day, he was transferred to another hospital.
At the second hospital, he reported a cough, occasionally productive of blood-streaked sputum, which he associated with the initiation of lisinopril 2 weeks earlier. The medication had been stopped, and the cough was improving. He also reported headaches and fatigue, with no orthopnea, chest pain, dizziness, photophobia, confusion, neck pain, difficulty speaking, joint pain or swelling, back pain, nausea, vomiting, rash, or urinary symptoms.
Past Medical History
There was a history of hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, hematuria and prostatic hypertrophy. Colonic polyps had been noted on a screening colonoscopy several years earlier. He had never been tested for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
Medications
Medications on admission included levofloxacin 500 mg (orally) daily, metronidazole 500 mg (intravenously) three times daily, atorvastatin, and aspirin.
Allergies
Penicillin had caused a rash in the remote past.
Family History
There was history of heart disease in his second-degree relatives.
Social History
He was retired.
Epidemiological History
He lived in a forested area near a large metropolitan center in the United States Northeast. Approximately 2-3 weeks earlier, he had traveled to Cape Cod, Massachusetts. He had traveled to Asia over 30 years earlier, had no recent international travel, and had no exposures to tuberculosis. He denied recent tick exposures or mosquito bites, and was not currently sexually active. He had smoked cigarettes for many years, and drank 2-3 alcoholic beverages several days each week.
Physical Examination
He appeared mildly dyspneic when conversing. The maximum temperature on the day of admission was 103.7°F (39.8°C); the pulse was 94 beats per minute, blood pressure 124/64 mm Hg, and respirations 18 breaths per minute. Oxygen saturation was 95% while breathing ambient air initially, and decreased intermittently to 83%. There were slightly diminished breath sounds throughout, and no wheezes, rales or dullness to percussion. There was a systolic murmur, loudest (2 on a scale from 0 to 6) at the left lower sternal border, and no extra heart sounds. The abdomen was soft, with no tenderness, hepatic or splenic enlargement or shifting dullness. There was trace pedal edema, and the remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white cell count was 6700 cells per cubic millimeter (69% neutrophils, 7% bands, 14% lymphocytes, 7% monocytes and 1% eosinophils), hematocrit 29.7%, hemoglobin 10.7 gm/dL, and platelet count 64,000 per cubic millimeter; the mean corpuscular volume was normal. The peripheral blood smear is shown in Figures 1 and 2. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 100 mm per hour. The level of plasma carbon dioxide level measured 19.7 mmol/l (reference range 23.0-31.9); calcium, phosphorus and magnesium were slightly decreased, and other electrolytes were normal. Direct bilirubin measured 1.3 (reference range 0-0.4), total bilirubin 3 mg/dl (ref. range 0.0-1.0), alanine aminotransferase 85 U/L (ref. range 10-55), aspartate aminotransferase 79 U/L (ref. range 10-40), and lactate dehydrogenase 886 U/L (ref. range 110-210); alkaline phosphatase and tests of renal function were normal.
A chest radiograph revealed hazy airspace opacities in the upper lobes bilaterally, mild emphysema, and small bilateral pleural effusions (Figure 3).
Figure 1. Blood smear, Giemsa stain.
Figure 2. Detail of Figure 1.
Figure 3. Chest radiograph.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated diverticulosis, with no evidence for diverticulitis. There were bilateral perinephric fluid collections, with no nephrolithiasis, and an enlarged prostate; the scan was otherwise normal.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The findings on Giemsa staining of the peripheral blood smear (thin smear) (Figures 1 and 2, and Figures 4 and 5) revealed Babesia, an intracellular parasite, with an estimated parasitemia of 7%. The upper lobar hazy airspace opacities seen on the chest radiograph were thought to represent non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema, or possibly pulmonary hemorrhage in the setting of thrombocytopenia, although atypical infection, caused by viral infection, Pneumocystis, Mycoplasma, or Legionella, were also considered. Test results for syphilis, viral hepatitis, human immunodeficiency virus, and Ehrlichia were negative. Cultures of the blood were sterile, and tests of the stool were negative for pathogens and Clostridium difficile toxin. Induced sputum specimens showed no Pneumocystis; cultures and stain were negative for Mycobacterium.
Figure 4. Blood smear, Giemsa stain.
Figure 5. Detail of Figure 4, with arrow.
Treatment and Followup
Atovaquone, azithromycin and doxycycline were administered for ten days. On the 3rd day, the patient experienced transient confusion, which subsequently resolved. Omeprazole was added after gastroscopy revealed a peptic ulcer. His fever and abdominal pain improved. His thrombocytopenia resolved by day 5; the hematocrit gradually fell to 21.0% on day 6, and he was transfused 3 units of packed red cells. A follow-up blood smear on the 9th hospital day showed no parasites.
Discussion
Babesiosis is a tick-borne febrile illness that may clinically resemble malaria, and is caused by a genus of intra-erythrocytic protozoan parasites, Babesia. B. microti is the species most commonly found on Cape Cod and in the Northeastern United States. In humans, Babesia infection is transmitted by nymph or adult forms of the Ixodes tick, which are present in the Northeastern United States. Less commonly, it can be transmitted by blood transfusions.
Like malaria, the pathophysiologic manifestations of babesiosis result from infection of erythrocytes with subsequent hemolysis and splenic sequestration. Clinically, babesiosis presents as an acute or subacute illness with fevers, chills, and fatigue. Hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia and hemoglobinuria are common; jaundice and splenomegaly may be present. In severe cases, microvascular obstruction may cause central nervous system, renal, or hepatic involvement. Pulmonary manifestations, while rare, are frequently due to non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
The clinical course of babesiosis is more severe in asplenic individuals and persons over the age of 60 years. At the time of this publication, current standard of care for treatment is combination therapy with azithromycin and atovaquone for 10 days; alternatively, clindamycin plus quinine may be given. Individuals who are immunocompromised, e.g. due to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), may require longer or repeated treatment courses.
The laboratory findings and morphologic appearance of the Plasmodium and Babesia species may be quite similar. Consequently, the diagnoses may be difficult to distinguish in patients who may have been in areas endemic for both organisms. Ring forms in erythrocytes (shown in the center of Figure 2) may be seen in both Plasmodium and Babesia infections. Banana gametocytes, schizonts and hemozoins (golden brown pigment clumps within infected erythrocytes that represent hemoglobin degradation by-products) are seen in P. falciparum infection and are not seen in Babesia infection. A rare but characteristic finding in Babesia infection is an intra-erythrocytic tetrad of merozoites, appearing in a ‘Maltese cross’ configuration. (Infected cells with four chromatin clumps can be seen in the lower left of Figure 2 and the center of Figure 5. An arrow in Figure 5 highlights a cell in which the intracellular chromatin is suggestive of a Maltese cross.) Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing is available and may detect low levels of parasitemia.
As this patient had been in an area endemic for B. microti, and had not traveled to an area endemic for malaria, and because of the parasitic morphology, malaria was thought to be unlikely. Of note, Lyme borreliosis and human granulocytic ehrlichiosis share a common vector (the Ixodes tick) and geographic distribution with Babesia, and concurrent infection should be considered.
Final Diagnosis
Babesiosis, most likely caused by Babesia microti (based on geographical distribution).
References
Gelfand JA and Vannier E, Chapter 279 Babesia Species in Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Ed., pages 3209-3213, 2005. Elsevier. Rogers WO, Chapter 136 Plasmodium and Babesia in Murray PR, Baron EJ, Jorgenson JH, Landry ML, Pfaller, MA. Manual of Clinical Microbiology. 9th ed. pages 2051-2054. 2007 American Society for Microbiology (ASM) Press.
Gelfand JA and Vannier E, Chapter 279 Babesia Species in Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Ed., pages 3209-3213, 2005. Elsevier.
Rogers WO, Chapter 136 Plasmodium and Babesia in Murray PR, Baron EJ, Jorgenson JH, Landry ML, Pfaller, MA. Manual of Clinical Microbiology. 9th ed. pages 2051-2054. 2007 American Society for Microbiology (ASM) Press.
