History of Present Illness
Summary: A man in his thirties with sinusitis and confusion.
A right-handed man in his thirties had been well until two weeks before admission when he developed symptoms of sinusitis. During the days immediately preceding his presentation, fatigue, somnolence, decreased appetite and oral intake had occurred. On the day of admission, the patient was confused and unable to speak. There was no history of fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, neck pain, headache, or trauma to his face or his head. He had not had head surgery or sinus surgery.
He was brought to another hospital where computed tomography (CT) revealed pneumocephalus. He was then transferred to a tertiary care hospital.
Past Medical History
There was a history of hypertension and bipolar disorder.
Medications
The patient had been on antihypertensive medications until a few weeks before admission.
Allergies
He had no allergies to medications.
Epidemiological History
There was no history of alcohol or illicit drug use and no epidemiologic exposures.
Physical Examination
The patient was mildly diaphoretic. The temperature was 101.6°F (38.7°C). He was aphasic and a right-sided hemiplegia was present.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 15,600 cells/mm³ (74% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 15% bands and 3% lymphocytes). The potassium was 2.6 mmol/liter, aspartate aminotransferase 165 U/liter, and alanine aminotransferase 145 U/liter.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a left subdural lesion consistent with an empyema and meningeal enhancement with left frontal and parietal lobe cerebritis (Figures 1 through 3). There was a 9-millimeter rightward midline shift with early uncal and subfalcine herniation and paranasal sinus mucosal thickening, with possible acute sinusitis.
Figure 1. MRI scan of the brain.
Figure 2. MRI scan of the brain with contrast.
Figure 3. MRI scan of the brain with contrast.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Craniectomy was performed with drainage of a subdural fluid collection. The gram stain of the aspirate showed mixed flora, including gram positive cocci in pairs and short chains and gram negative rods of mixed morphology (Figures 4 and 5).
Culture of the aspirate later grew multiple organisms including anaerobic organisms, Fusobacterium necrophorum and Peptostreptococcus, and aerobic organisms consistent with Streptococcus anginosus (milleri group). In addition, three out of four blood cultures drawn at initial presentation were positive for Streptococcus anginosus (milleri group). Two of four bottles were positive for Fusobacterium necrophorum and Peptostreptococcus species.
Figure 4. Gram stain of an aspirate from a subdural collection.
Figure 5. Detail of Figure 4.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was initially treated with broad spectrum antimicrobial therapy (vancomycin, ceftriaxone and metronidazole). The blood cultures cleared the following day. He required repeat drainage because of reaccumulation of the subdural collection.
Antimicrobial therapy was changed to penicillin and metronidazole, which were continued for approximately 6 weeks. He was seen in follow-up on several occasions and made slow improvement with rehabilitation. Cranioplasty was performed one year after his initial presentation.
Discussion
Subdural empyema (abscess) is an intracranial focal collection of purulent material located between the dura mater and the arachnoid mater. A single abscess focus in the brain is most likely from contiguous spread. Mastoiditis, otitis, sinus infection, or dental infections can lead to contiguous spread. Thorough examination of the sinuses, mouth and ears should be done at the time of an initial examination.
If multiple abscess foci are found, hematogenous spread should be suspected. Bacterial endocarditis is one possible source of hematogenous spread.
Brain abscesses usually possess mixed flora and often include anaerobic pathogens. Fusobacterium and Peptostreptococcus are both common pathogens isolated; Bacteroides species (including B. fragilis), Prevotella melaninogenica, Propionibacterium, Eubacterium, Veillonella, and Actinomyces may also be isolated. Of the aerobic bacteria, Streptococcus (milleri group) is particularly common because it predisposes to necrosis and abscess formation. If the patient has had sinus or intracranial surgery, then Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa should be suspected.
Treatment with broad spectrum antibiotics is appropriate for empiric coverage. Once the etiology is known a more selective choice of antibiotics is appropriate.
Final Diagnosis
Intracranial subdural empyema, with mixed flora (including anaerobic organisms, Fusobacterium necrophorum and Peptostreptococcus, and aerobic organisms consistent with Streptococcus anginosus (milleri group)), following sinusitis.
References
Hicks, C.W., Weber, J.G., Reid, J.R., and Moodley, M. (2011). Identifying and managing intracranial complications of sinusitis in children: a retrospective series. Pediatr Infect Dis J 30, 222-226.
PMID:21416657(PubMed abstract) Kombogiorgas, D., Seth, R., Athwal, R., Modha, J., and Singh, J. (2007). Suppurative intracranial complications of sinusitis in adolescence. Single institute experience and review of literature. Br J Neurosurg 21, 603-609.
PMID:18071989(PubMed abstract) Osborn, M.K., and Steinberg, J.P. (2007). Subdural empyema and other suppurative complications of paranasal sinusitis. Lancet Infect Dis 7, 62-67.
PMID:17182345(PubMed abstract)
Hicks, C.W., Weber, J.G., Reid, J.R., and Moodley, M. (2011). Identifying and managing intracranial complications of sinusitis in children: a retrospective series. Pediatr Infect Dis J 30, 222-226.
PMID:21416657(PubMed abstract)
Kombogiorgas, D., Seth, R., Athwal, R., Modha, J., and Singh, J. (2007). Suppurative intracranial complications of sinusitis in adolescence. Single institute experience and review of literature. Br J Neurosurg 21, 603-609.
PMID:18071989(PubMed abstract)
Osborn, M.K., and Steinberg, J.P. (2007). Subdural empyema and other suppurative complications of paranasal sinusitis. Lancet Infect Dis 7, 62-67.
PMID:17182345(PubMed abstract)
