History of Present Illness
IDSA 2007 Fellows Day Case Submission Summary: A man with right upper quadrant abdominal pain for six months.
A man in his thirties was admitted to the hospital with intractable abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant, of six months’ duration. At the time of the onset of the abdominal pain, dyspnea and a productive cough had occurred, and resolved with no antibiotic therapy. He described the pain as “gnawing” and “pushing” in quality, gradually increasing over time and focused in the right upper quadrant. Lying on his right side exacerbated the pain.
During the previous 2-3 months, some swelling of the skin had developed over the area where he experienced the pain. He had had an occasional cough over the previous several weeks that was recently productive of purulent sputum. There was no hemoptysis, dyspnea, fevers, chills, or night sweats. He reported a normal appetite without early satiety or weight loss.
Past Medical History
He was previously healthy with no known medical illnesses, no history of surgery, but had a history of a traumatic stab wound to the left scapular region.
Epidemiological History
The patient was incarcerated at the time of the onset of symptoms, and had previously lived in the Southwestern United States. Within the previous year, he had been in an automobile accident and had also suffered an assault with trauma. There was no travel outside the area, known tuberculosis exposure, animal exposure, recent stab wounds, bites, injections, other breaks in the skin at the site of his pain or intravenous drug use. He reported a ten pack-year smoking history, occasional alcohol consumption, and occasional marijuana use. A tuberculosis skin test had been negative within the year.
Physical Examination
On examination, he appeared well, and was fully alert and oriented. The temperature was 36.8°C (98.2°F), and other vital signs were normal. There was gingivitis and several teeth were chipped. The pulmonary exam did not reveal any adventitial breath sounds. Soft tissue swelling near the right lower costal border, roughly 3-4 centimeters in diameter, was present. There was no evidence of a break in the skin or sinus tract at the surface. He had moderate right upper quadrant tenderness in the region, without rebound or guarding. Bowel sounds were present throughout. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 20,500 cells per mm³, with 80% granulocytes, 11% lymphocytes, and 9 % monocytes. The hemoglobin was 10.3 grams/deciliter and platelet count was 513,000 per mm³. The aspartate aminotransferase was 14 units per liter, alanine aminotransferase 30 units per liter, alkaline phosphatase 204 units per liter, and albumin was 3.5 grams/deciliter, urea nitrogen 13 milligrams/deciliter and creatinine of 0.6 milligrams/deciliter. The electrolytes were normal.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Computed tomography (CT) scan of the lower thorax, abdomen, and pelvis revealed a large subphrenic abscess, measuring 11.8 centimeters (cm) by 6.1 cm by 15.0 cm, with a multiseptated, peripherally enhancing, fluid collection. There was a second 3.7 cm by 6.2 cm collection just below the right ribcage in the subcutaneous tissues (Figure 1). Also noted was a small layering right pleural effusion with parenchymal airspace opacification that was suggestive of atelectasis or pneumonia (Figure 2).
Interventional radiologists placed a drain, and 500 cubic centimeters of thick, foul-smelling, purulent fluid was removed.
Figure 1. CT of the abdomen.
Figure 2. CT of the lower thorax.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Gram stain of the aspirated fluid, shown in Figure 3, revealed numerous gram-positive, beaded filamentous rods. Actinomyces israelii grew in culture. The anaerobic cultures also grew Capnocytophaga and Fusobacterium species.
Figure 3. Gram stain of aspirate.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was treated with intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam. Within one week of therapy, a repeat CT scan revealed a marked decrease in size of the subphrenic abscess, as well as complete resolution of the thoracic disease. The drain was successfully removed, and he was discharged from the inpatient facility.
Discussion
Actinomyces israelii is an anaerobic gram-positive beaded, filamentous rod typically found in the mouth. The organism is known to cause oral disease, such as “lumpy jaw,” as well as gastrointestinal disease and lung abscesses. In this particular patient, aspiration of a food particle or chipped tooth may have initiated the infection, which then crossed the diaphragm from the lung. Pelvic actinomycosis has also been associated with intra-uterine devices. Actinomyces tends to be a slow-growing organism that can cross normal tissue planes and create abscesses. As the infection progresses, the organism often forms sinus tracts, which may leak pus, as well as characteristic sulfur granules. At this writing, Actinomyces is susceptible to penicillin, which is the drug of choice for treatment.
Final Diagnosis
Subphrenic abscess due to Actinomyces israelii, and other anaerobic bacteria.
References
Russo, TA, "Chapter 253: Agents of Actinomycosis." in Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Ed., Vol. 2. 2005. 2924-31.
