History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Case Summary: A woman with a non-healing cat scratch wound.
A woman was scratched by a cat at a veterinarian’s office four weeks before admission. A single small puncture wound from a claw was noted, without other complications. There were no other recollections about the cat noted.
One week later, the lesion became raised and erythematous, and the following week it was the size of a dime (1.5-2.0 cm) and pustular. Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid was administered.
One week before admission, the lesion had increased to the size of a quarter (2.0-2.5 cm), with expanding erythema and red streaking up her arm. Ciprofloxacin was added to the amoxicillin-clavulanic acid. The patient presented to the emergency room because of the increasing wound, and reported recent low-grade fevers.
Past Medical History
She had a history of endometriosis.
Medications
Medications included amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, ciprofloxacin, and oral contraceptives.
Epidemiological History
The patient had children and worked with animals. She had traveled to Australia two years before, with no additional travel since.
Physical Examination
She was well-developed and in no apparent distress. The temperature was 36.8°C (98.2°F), pulse 100 beats per minute, blood pressure 100/50 mm Hg, and respirations 12 breaths per minute. The right wrist had an moderately tender, ulcerated lesion (2 by 2 cm) with no purulence; scant clear discharge was noted. There was patchy red streaking extending up the arm and an antecubital node was palpated. The right axilla was mildly tender, with a small palpable nodule (Figures 1 and 2).
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Figure 2. Physical finding.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 4,600/mm³ (67% leukocytes, 24% lymphocytes, 9% monocytes), hematocrit 38%, and platelet count 293,000/mm³. The levels of electrolytes, glucose, urea nitrogen, creatinine, and tests of liver function were normal.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The antibiotics were discontinued. The wound was cultured, and Bartonella serologies were sent. Azithromycin was started empirically while awaiting culture results, with some improvement.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The wound culture of the right wrist exhibited slow growth of colonies that were small and white. Pigment was seen developing in the center of colonies, with possible rosettes (Figures 3 and 4). The organism was identified as Sporothrix schenckii.
Figure 3. Culture plate of wound.
Figure 4. Wound culture plate under microscope.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was initially treated with itraconazole orally. However, within 24 hours, she developed a severe full body rash (Figure 5), and the drug was discontinued.
Subsequently, amphotericin B was administered, which was changed to liposomal amphotericin because of the development of acute renal insufficiency. She received liposomal amphotericin for 3 weeks, with excellent resolution of the ulcer and decrease in the size of the right arm nodules (Figure 6). She then received a course of ketoconazole for 4 weeks, until the ulcer had completely resolved. Following completion of anti-fungal therapy, she had no evidence of recurrent disease.
Figure 5. Reaction to treatment.
Figure 6. Two months after treatment.
Discussion
Final Diagnosis
Sporotrichosis caused by Sporothrix schenckii and acquired from feline claws.
References
