History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Summary: An elderly woman with cyanosis of the fingers.
An elderly woman presented with a one-week history of increasing weakness and malaise. Three days before admission, she was scratched by a turtle on the index finger of her left hand. She reported nausea, vomiting, and loose bowel movements for one day, associated with lightheadedness and subjective chills at home. After admission, her fingers became cyanotic with increasing pain and numbness.
Past Medical History
She had hypertension and hyponatremia, and was status post thyroidectomy.
Medications
She was taking enalapril.
Allergies
She had no known allergies.
Epidemiological History
She lived in a rural area of Texas and owned several dogs. She did not smoke, reported no illicit drug or heavy alcohol use, and had not traveled outside of the state.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared well. The temperature was 38.8°C (101.8°F), pulse 110 beats per minute, blood pressure 85/60 mm Hg, and respirations 20 breaths per minute. The head and neck examination was normal. There were firm mobile non-tender masses in each breast. The lungs were clear. The heart rhythm was regular and there were no murmurs. There was no hepatosplenomegaly. There was acrocyanosis on the distal tips of all fingers (Figures 1 and 2).
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Figure 2. Physical findings.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 2,300/mm³, hemoglobin 12.3 gm/dL, and platelet count 33,000/mm³. The sodium was 123 mmol/L, potassium 4.3 mmol/L, chloride 95 mmol/L, CO2 19 mmol/L, glucose 73 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 54 mg/dL, creatinine 2.9 mg/dL. The prothrombin time (PT) was 12.3 seconds and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) 31 seconds; the level of C3 was 74 and C4 14.5. Urinalysis and liver function tests were normal.
The chest radiograph was normal. Blood cultures (6 out of 6) grew gram-negative bacilli.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient developed acute renal failure, but did not require hemodialysis. The cyanosis gradually improved. The thrombocytopenia initially worsened and then gradually improved.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Capnocytophaga was identified growing in six blood cultures obtained over 3 days.
Treatment and Followup
The patient did not develop endocarditis. The thrombocytopenia and acute renal failure resolved. She was treated with ampicillin-sulbactam for 14 days.
A presumptive diagnosis of Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome (HUS) secondary to Capnocytophaga bacteremia was made on the basis of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, acute renal failure and thrombocytopenia, with normal clotting times. The patient never underwent plasmapheresis.
Discussion
Capnocytophaga is a fastidious, slow-growing, gram-negative, rod-shaped bacterium that belongs to the normal flora of dogs and cats. Alcohol abuse is an important associated risk factor for the development of septicemic Capnocytophaga infection. Bacteremia rarely manifests with disseminated intravascular consumption coagulopathy or purpura.
Most of the cases of Capnocytophaga bacteremia occur in patients with hematologic malignancy and neutropenia. Infection may be associated with severe oropharyngeal mucositis or periodontal disease. Capnocytophaga bacteremia is usually an uncomplicated infection without serious organ involvement and has a good outcome after antibiotic therapy. Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) has been rarely described with Capnocytophaga infection. To our knowledge, at the time of this publication, acrocyanosis secondary to vasculitis with HUS and Capnocytophaga has not been reported. The patient was thought to have contracted the bacteremia after her dog licked the injury caused by the turtle.
Final Diagnosis
Capnocytophaga bacteremia with hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS).
References
