History of Present Illness
A woman in her forties presented to the emergency department with a one-week history of progressive myalgias, arthralgias, and severe right ankle pain, accompanied by episodic fevers and sore throat. The day prior to hospitalization, she remained bed-bound with high fever, and was unable to mobilize without a wheelchair due to pain.
Her arthralgias were diffuse and migratory in the upper and lower extremities, especially shoulders, elbows, knees, and ankles. The right ankle had become progressively swollen, red, and painful over the preceding 2 days. She denied rash, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dysuria, cough, or headache. She denied recent travel, sick contacts, or new sexual partners. She denied knowing of any specific trigger for this illness.
Past Medical History
She reported a history of hypertension. She was obese with previous laparoscopic banding procedure, and denied any allergies.
Medications
The patient increased her use of acetaminophen 300mg/codeine 30mg without relief and was on regular ramipril and desogestrel ethinyl estradiol without recent medication changes.
Epidemiological History
The patient lived in an urban home with her husband and daughters, dogs, cats, and domesticated rats. She did not report animal or insect bites. She smoked marijuana, but denied any other illicit drug use, tobacco use, or significant alcohol intake. She had been monogamous in her relationship without new sexual contacts. She did not have significant occupational exposures or recent travel.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared sick, but not septic, with fever to 39.6°C, blood pressure 135/80 mmHg, pulse 92 beats per minute, and respirations 20 breaths per minute. All joints and muscles were exquisitely tender to palpation especially the shoulders, forearms, arms, knees, and ankles. No active synovitis was noted other than the right ankle, which appeared erythematous, swollen, and hot. The retropharynx was erythematous without exudates or lymphadenopathy. Cardiac, respiratory, abdominal, neurologic, and dermatologic examinations were unremarkable.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 18.0 x 10 9 cells/L (reference range (ref) 4.0 – 11.0), predominantly neutrophils (13.4 x 10 9 cells/L) with associated lymphopenia (1.6 x 10 9 cells/L), hemoglobin 98 g/L (ref 130-165), and platelet count 405 x 10 9 cells/L (ref 150 – 400). Electrolytes, liver enzymes and renal function test results were normal.
The C-reactive protein was extremely elevated at 508 mg/L (ref 1.0 – 7.0). An extensive autoimmune work-up was negative.
Right ankle and chest radiographs were normal.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was admitted to the hospital for further work-up and observation. She was hydrated with intravenous fluids and her pain was controlled with narcotics. Blood cultures were drawn and were negative. Arthrocentesis of the right ankle revealed cloudy straw-colored fluid, and gram stain showed 3+ polymorphonuclear cells but no organisms. Insufficient fluid remained for cell count or biochemistry. Synovial fluid was inoculated in pediatric blood culture media, as well as blood agar and chocolate agar plates. Growth was detected in both the pediatric blood culture bottle and on blood agar plate after 48-hours of incubation. Gram stain at 1000x oil magnification is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Gram Stain (1000x oil immersion) of right ankle synovial fluid
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Grey non-hemolytic colonies grew on blood agar plates. Gram stain was performed and described as gram-negative, pleomorphic, filamentous organisms with fusiform characteristics, and characteristic lateral bulbar swellings (Figure 1). The organism was identified as Streptobacillus moniliformis by Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF) (Bruker, Milton, Ontario, MBT Compass Library RUO6903) and confirmed with 16S ribosomal ribonucleic acid (rRNA) polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were determined by gradient diffusion using Etest antibiotic strips (bioMérieux, Montréal, Québec). As there are no specific breakpoints for this organism, we inferred antimicrobial susceptibility using the CLSI MIC criteria for “ other non-Enterobacteriaceae ”, which suggested this was susceptible to penicillin (0.125 mg/L), ceftriaxone (0.008 mg/L), imipenem (0.094 mg/L), meropenem (0.032 mg/L), and ciprofloxacin (0.25 mg/L). The isolate was predictably resistant to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Blood cultures remained negative on several occasions.
Following culture results, further clinical history was obtained regarding the domestic rats which was not revealed in the first encounter. She reported purchasing three domestic rats using an online classified website 18 months prior. One died months prior, one was healthy, and the last was recently sick, with weight loss, inactivity, and poor oral intake. In consultation with a veterinarian, the rat was euthanized, but prior to this, the patient “kissed the rat goodbye” on the snout and received 2 soft, non-painful bites on the tongue. The bites occurred 4 days prior to onset of illness, and no local effects were evident. In the absence of localized effects, the patient did not feel significant contact was made with the rat, and did not report this on initial history.
Treatment and Followup
Treatment was initiated empirically with ceftriaxone. After speciation, she was switched to intravenous penicillin G, then back to ceftriaxone due to issues with line access. A few days into admission, she developed severe right shoulder pain with immobility and clinical features of septic arthritis, which was managed conservatively with antibiotics. She continued to have migratory generalized polyarthralgias, and decreased mobility, therefore a 6-week course of antibiotics was planned. The patient ultimately received 5 weeks of antibiotics due to challenges obtaining intravenous access and clinical stability. Transthoracic echocardiography did not show evidence of vegetations. In follow up, she developed asymptomatic T-cell large granular lymphocyte proliferation, which was followed by hematology and resolved without treatment. Her pain slowly improved to baseline over 2 to 3 months.
Discussion
Rat bite fever is an acute systemic illness characterized by relapsing fever, migratory polyarthralgias, and rash. The predominant pathogen responsible for cases in North America is Streptobacillus moniliformis; Spirillum minus is more common in Asia. While illnesses related to rat bites have been documented back 2,300 years, the incidence of rat bite fever is unknown. Several cases are described annually, predominantly in children and those in close contact with domestic rats (1).
The systemic illness typically manifests less than days 10 days after a bite from an infected rat or after close contact with S. moniliformis colonization in the saliva or excreta. A bite is not necessary for transmission, and up to 30% will have no known source of inoculation. The incubation period varies from 1 to 22 days (1).
The clinical presentation can have striking similarities to rheumatoid arthritis, as the polyarthralgias and arthritis often affects multiple joints, including small and large joints (2). There is a predilection for the ankles, and the presence of tender hemorrhagic vesicles on the hands and feet is strongly suggestive of infection. Other clinical features include abrupt onset of fevers which may be relapsing, profound rigors, pharyngitis, severe myalgias and signs of upper respiratory tract infection. Of special interest, the bite site typically does not become infected, inflamed, or painful and no local effects are suffered. There is generally an absence of lymphadenopathy. While T-cell large granular lymphocytosis has previously been associated with other inflammatory arthropathies, to our knowledge, this is the first case reported following infection with Streptobacillus moniliformis (3). Left untreated mortality rates are high with death occurring in 7-13% of cases (1).
Diagnosis requires a high clinical index of suspicion, appropriate use of culture, and identification by MALDI-TOF or molecular testing. It is a slow growing organism which requires prolonged incubation and careful attention to culture media. Characteristic gram stain results are shown and described in Figure 1. Typically, the gram-negative rod appears straight but may be fusiform, may develop characteristic lateral bulbar swelling, and is usually arranged in chains and loosely tangled clumps (1). Commercial blood culture media contains 0.05% sodium polyanethol sulfonate (SPS), an anticoagulant which inhibits its growth; therefore anaerobic culture bottles, resin bead culture systems, and/or trypticase soy agar and broth should be used for culture (4).
The clinical picture can mimic sepsis from beta-hemolytic streptococci or Staphylococcus aureus; in addition, other bacterial causes should be considered (disseminated gonorrhea, meningococcemia, Lyme disease, ehrlichiosis, brucellosis, and complications of streptococcal diseases like scarlet fever, rheumatic fever, and reactive arthritis). While S. moniliformis typically produces characteristic gram stain findings, some mimickers include Fusobacterium necrophorum (pleomorphic gram-negative bacilli, but not typically branching, and clinically is associated with septic thrombophlebitis of the head and neck), Pasteurella multocida (often pleomorphic gram-negative cocco-bacilli, clinically associated with cat and dog bite site infections), and Leptotrichia buccalis (long and tapering gram-negative bacilli, typically only associated with invasive disease in immunocompromised hosts). While beta-lactam damaged E. coli can take on a variety of morphologies via gram stain, septicemia from E. coli is rarely accompanied by septic arthritis.
Penicillin is the treatment of choice; treatment duration varies based upon response to therapy and presence of complications (5). Ceftriaxone has been used successfully, and tetracycline can be used in the setting of penicillin allergy (1).
In conclusion, a detailed search for epidemiological clues, including exposure to domestic rats is important in diagnosis and appropriate treatment of rat bite fever. The non-specific clinical features and challenges in microbial isolation make diagnosis difficult. When suspected, care should be taken in selecting culture media without the presence of SPS which inhibits growth.
Teaching points:
A detailed review of epidemiological risks is important for patients presenting with a non-specific febrile illness.
Patients with domestic rats, especially after exposures to bites, should be investigated for rat bite fever caused by Streptobacillus moniliformis in the appropriate clinical context.
Rat bite fever typically manifests with relapsing fever, migratory polyarthralgias, and rash.
Growth is inhibited by SPS anticoagulant, commonly found in blood culture bottles.
We describe the first case of T-cell large granular lymphocytosis as a complication of rat bite fever.
The treatment of choice is with penicillin.
Final Diagnosis
Rat bite fever (Streptobacillus moniliformis)
References
Elliott SP. Rat bite fever, Streptobacillus moniliformis. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2007;20(1):13–22.
PMID:17223620(PubMed abstract) Legout L, Senneville E, Mulleman D, Solau-Gervais E, Flipo RM, Mouton Y. Rat bite fever mimicking rheumatoid arthritis. Scand J Infect Dis [Internet]. 2005;37(6–7):532–3.
PMID:16012023(PubMed abstract) Prochorec-Sobieszek M, Rymkiewicz G, Makuch-Lasica H, Majewski M, Michalak K, Rupinski R, et al. Characteristics of T-cell large granular lymphocyte proliferations associated with neutropenia and inflammatory arthropathy. Arthritis Res Ther. 2008;10(3):1–12
PMID:18474096(PubMed abstract) Lambe DW, McPhedran AM, Mertz JA, Stewart P. Streptobacillus moniliformis isolated from a case of Haverhill fever: biochemical characterization and inhibitory effect of sodium polyanethol sulfonate. Am J Clin Pathol [Internet]. 1973 Dec;60(6):854-60.
PMID:4586017(PubMed abstract) Suzuki K, Hirai Y, Morita F, Nakamura A, Uehara Y, Naito T. Streptobacillus moniliformis Bacteremia in a Pet Shop Employee: Case Report and Literature Review. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2017;4(2):1–3.
PMID:28730157(PubMed abstract)
Elliott SP. Rat bite fever, Streptobacillus moniliformis. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2007;20(1):13–22.
PMID:17223620(PubMed abstract)
Legout L, Senneville E, Mulleman D, Solau-Gervais E, Flipo RM, Mouton Y. Rat bite fever mimicking rheumatoid arthritis. Scand J Infect Dis [Internet]. 2005;37(6–7):532–3.
PMID:16012023(PubMed abstract)
Prochorec-Sobieszek M, Rymkiewicz G, Makuch-Lasica H, Majewski M, Michalak K, Rupinski R, et al. Characteristics of T-cell large granular lymphocyte proliferations associated with neutropenia and inflammatory arthropathy. Arthritis Res Ther. 2008;10(3):1–12
PMID:18474096(PubMed abstract)
Lambe DW, McPhedran AM, Mertz JA, Stewart P. Streptobacillus moniliformis isolated from a case of Haverhill fever: biochemical characterization and inhibitory effect of sodium polyanethol sulfonate. Am J Clin Pathol [Internet]. 1973 Dec;60(6):854-60.
PMID:4586017(PubMed abstract)
Suzuki K, Hirai Y, Morita F, Nakamura A, Uehara Y, Naito T. Streptobacillus moniliformis Bacteremia in a Pet Shop Employee: Case Report and Literature Review. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2017;4(2):1–3.
PMID:28730157(PubMed abstract)
