History of Present Illness
IDSA 2004 Summary: A man with fatigue, fever, aches and photophobia.
A man in his fifties presented with increasing fatigue of three-to-four weeks' duration. Five days before presentation, photophobia, fevers (which occurred throughout the day and improved with ibuprofen), shaking chills and diaphoresis that soaked the sheets occurred. He reported diffuse aches, particularly in the head, neck, chest, and calves; a dry mouth; dry cough and mild dysuria. The urine appeared dark orange.
There was no weight loss, nausea, vomiting or diarrhea. The patient increased his oral intake of water.
Past Medical History
He had hypothyroidism, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), and a recent left axillary cyst, which had been treated with antibiotics ten days before presentation. He had had coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) several years earlier; a recent echocardiogram had not shown decreased ejection fraction.
Medications
Daily medications included thyroxine, atorvastatin, pantoprazole, lisinopril, and aspirin. Ibuprofen was taken as needed for fevers. Previous therapies had included malarial prophylaxis while the patient was abroad 3-6 months before and a course of antibiotics ten days earlier.
Epidemiological History
The patient had had no recent sick contacts. He was married and had traveled extensively, most recently to the Middle East three-to-six months earlier. He had gone camping for one week in the Sierra Nevada mountains and had noted the onset of fever and myalgias on the last day of that trip.
He did not smoke tobacco or abuse alcohol.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared well-nourished, tired and uncomfortable. The temperature was 38.1°C (100.6°F) on admission, and rose to 40°C (104°F) within six hours. On admission, the blood pressure was 86/50 mm Hg, pulse 94 beats per minute, respirations 24 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation 100% while breathing ambient air. The sclerae were injected and the oral mucosa was dry. There were oral lesions in the right upper and lower labial fold. The neck was supple without lymphadenopathy. There were crackles at the lung bases and a 2/6 systolic ejection murmur was present. The midepigastrium and right upper quadran were tender with deep palpation. The calves were tender; Homan's sign was negative. There was no clubbing, cyanosis, rash, petechiae or edema.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 6,590 cells/uL (polymorphonuclear leukocytes 39%, bands 42%, lymphocytes 5%, monocytes 13%), hematocrit 34.5%, and platelets 15,000/mm³. The peripheral blood smear is shown (Figures 1 and 2). The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 91 mm per hour. Prothrombin time was 14.9 seconds, partial thromboplastin time 32 seconds, and INR 1.2.
The level of plasma sodium was 135 mmol/L, potassium 2.8 mmol/L, chloride 101 mmol/L, bicarbonate 22 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen 20 mg/dL, creatinine 1.3 mg/dL, glucose 96 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 174 U/L, bilirubin 1.9 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 36 U/L and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 27U/L, total protein 6.1 g/dL, albumin 3.0 g/dL, lactate dehydrogenase 531 U/L, amylase < 30 U/L, and lipase 61 U/L. The level of vitamin B12 was 401 pg/ml and folate 13.8 ng/ml. The urinalysis contained trace protein.
Figure 1. Blood smear.
Figure 2. Blood smear.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Spirochetes of Borrelia are seen in Figures 1 and 2.
Treatment and Followup
Discussion
Final Diagnosis
Relapsing fever caused by Borreliosis.
References
