History of Present Illness
2010 July-August Featured Case and Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A woman with recurrent fevers after visiting Bangladesh.
A woman in her early twenties was well until one week before presentation, when she reportedly developed fevers up to 104°F (Fever is the most common symptom in severe systemic infection, and high fevers with rigors suggest -but do not prove- bloodstream infection.) (40°C), associated with chills and occasional rigors. She took acetaminophen (Acetaminophen, which acts as an antipyretic and analgesic, may be taken by patients with febrile illnesses for comfort, but may also sometimes be taken under the mistaken impression that the fever itself is harmful. It is important to ask about antipyretic use, since this can mask a fever or make a constant fever appear sporadic.), with transient improvement; however, fevers recurred daily. Three days before admission (The timing and tempo of symptoms provide important diagnostic clues. In this case, the patient had high fever beginning two weeks after travel, then diarrhea several days after that, which would be uncommon for most ordinary gastroenteritis.), she had non-bloody diarrhea (The absence of blood is evidence against enterohemorrhagic infections such as Shigellosis, classic bacillary dysentery.). The next day, she developed occasional cough (Localizing symptoms such as cough may occur even when the infection is primarily acting elsewhere in the body. For example, malaria, typhoid fever, and dengue -the top three serious causes of fever in the returning traveller- can all be associated with coughing in a significant minority of patients, even though none are primarily lung infections.) productive of clear sputum and infrequent nausea, without vomiting. She reported no hematochezia, melena, hemoptysis, hematuria, dark urine, bone pain, myalgias, arthralgias or rash. She had had an intermittent headache and fatigue.
Three weeks before presentation (An incubation period is often a useful clue. Appearance of symptoms more than two weeks after exposure argues against most ordinary infections and in particular against most viral infections other than hepatitis, Epstein Barr virus, and HIV.), she had returned to the United States from a month-long visit to her family's home in Bangladesh (People returning to visit friends and relatives are a major source of travel-related illness, since they may mistakenly feel that they do not require precautions such as malaria prophylaxis, vaccines, and avoidance of unsafe water.). She had had no ill contacts during the trip, and had not taken malaria prophylaxis. Her roommate had recently recovered from a mild upper respiratory illness.
Past Medical History
She was previously well.
Medications
As above, she had taken acetaminophen for fevers. She had not taken malaria prophylaxis, did not know her hepatitis vaccination history, and had not received typhoid, H1N1 or seasonal influenza vaccinations.
Allergies
She had no known allergies.
Social History
She was a student.
Epidemiological History
She was from Bangladesh and attended college in the United States. During her month-long trip home, she had lived in an apartment complex and only visited urban areas. She reported some mosquito bites during the trip and did not exclusively drink bottled water (Exposure to unsafe water is a major risk for gastrointestinal infections, notably enteric bacteria and Hepatitis A.). She reported no exposures to animals (including pets), had not gone swimming (History of water exposure is important to elicit, since fever in a traveller with fresh water exposure raises several possibilities, notably Schistosomiasis.) in fresh or salt water, and was not sexually active (Sexual history is an important part of the travel-related fever work-up, especially since both HIV and hepatitis B virus can present as non-specific fever.).
Physical Examination
The temperature (Normal temperatures occurring between high fevers might be a sign of an infection with this alternating pattern, such as malaria, or might be due to acetaminophen use. The distinction is important since absence of fever can mislead attempts at diagnosis.) was 98.4°F (36.9°C), blood pressure 101/61 mm Hg, pulse 53 beats per minute, and respirations 14 breaths per minute with oxygen saturation with 99% while breathing ambient air. The heart and lung sounds were normal. Bowel sounds were present, and there was no abdominal tenderness or organomegaly. The remainder of the examination was normal. While in the emergency department, the temperature rose to 104°F (40.0°C), and she experienced rigors.
Studies
The white cell count (The absolute white cell count provides useful diagnostic information. A normal white blood cell count would be uncommon in serious bacterial infection with the important exception that in severe infection white blood cells may be being consumed as quickly as they are produced. For this reason, it is important to have a manually-read count of the types of white cells, known as the "differential". A large number of immature neutrophils, known as "bands", would be worrisome in the context of a normal white cell count.) was 5700 per cubic millimeter (reference range 4500-11,000) with 64% neutrophils, 29% lymphocytes, and 7% monocytes; the hematocrit was 39.0% and the platelets 149,000 per cubic millimeter. The level of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 90 U/L (ref 7-30) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 123 U/L (ref 9-32). Other tests, including levels of electrolytes, alkaline phosphatase, albumin, globulin, total and direct bilirubin and tests of renal function, were normal. A chest radiograph (Figure 1) showed clear, well-inflated lungs with mild elevation of the left hemidiaphragm, and was otherwise normal.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
During the first day, the temperature rose to 106.7°F (41.5°C), associated with rigors, and an episode of non-bloody diarrhea occurred. Ceftriaxone (Information about local antibiotic resistance patterns is critical. In this case, ceftriaxone, a third generation cephalosporin, would have been used because of the high rates of resistance to quinolone antibiotics on the Indian sub-continent.) was administered empirically (For patients with severe symptoms - particularly the combination of high fever and low blood pressure - it is critical to quickly obtain relevant cultures and then start antibiotics empirically while waiting for culture data to come back. A delay in therapy may lead to increased risk of mortality.).
A rapid malaria test (Malaria is the most common cause of death from infection in travelers, so it is essential to rule this out promptly in anyone returning from a malarial area with fever. Classically, this was done by direct examination of the blood smear for parasites, but recently rapid antigen detection tests have become available, requiring less operator expertise.) was negative. Within 24 hours, both anaerobic and aerobic bottles of a blood culture specimen were positive; gram stain is shown in Figure 2 (photograph courtesy of Ji Yeon Kim, MD). On the second day, the level of lactate dehydrogenase was 737 U/L (ref 110-210). The level of ALT rose to 644 U/L and AST U/L 1044 by the 3rd day.
Figure 2. Gram stain of blood culture.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Cultures of the blood grew Gram-negative rods (Figure 3, photograph courtesy of Ji Yeon Kim, MD) in both aerobic and anaerobic bottles, which were later identified as Salmonella typhi. Cultures showing growth of S. typhi on MacConkey and blood agar plates are shown in Figures 4 and 5 respectively. Serologic tests for antibodies to Salmonella flagellar (H) and somatic (O) antigens were positive.
Thick and thin smears of the blood showed no intra- or extracellular organisms by Giemsa staining. Dientamoeba fragilis trophozoites (Figures 6) and abundant Blastocystis hominis (Figures 7) were found upon examination of a stool specimen (D. fragilis and B. hominis are unlikely to be pathogens in a normal host. Their presence here is a sign, however, of exposure to unsafe water, their main mode of transmission. This finding should alert the clinician to look for other sanitation-related infections.). Serologic testing for Epstein Barr virus (EBV) was consistent with past infection; results for heterophile antibody (The mono-spot test for mononucleosis, called heterophile, takes advantage of the fact that serum from people with acute EBV infection will cause horse red blood cells to clump.) and hepatitis B surface antigen were negative and hepatitis B surface antibody was equivocal. Testing for other infections, including Leptospira, Dengue fever, schistosomiasis, Legionella, Ehrlichia, hepatitis A virus, hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus, cytomegalovirus, influenza A and B viruses, parainfluenza, adenovirus and respiratory syncytial virus, was negative.
Figure 3. Gram stain of blood culture.
Figure 4. Subculture on MacConkey agar.
Figure 5. Subculture on blood agar.
Figure 6. Chlorazol black staining of stool specimen, with Dientamoeba fragilis trophozoites.
Figure 7. Chlorazol black staining of stool specimen, with Blastocystis hominis.
Treatment and Followup
Ceftriaxone (2 gm daily, intravenously) was administered on admission. After she improved clinically, the temperatures returned to normal and susceptibility testing was available, ceftriaxone was stopped and oral ciprofloxacin (At the time of this patient's presentation, oral ciprofloxacin is the drug of choice for antibiotic-susceptible strains of S. typhi. In practice, what is actually measured is sensitivity to nalidixic acid, the prototype quinolone, since this can best detect low-level resistance to ciprofloxacin.) (500 mg twice daily) and metronidazole (500 mg three times daily) were begun. Upon discharge on the seventh day, the levels of transaminases were gradually improving; antibiotics were continued as an outpatient, for a total course of 14-days.
Discussion
Fever in the returning traveler must be considered carefully and urgently, as prompt diagnosis and rapid treatment may be necessary. In this patient’s presentation, with fevers, rigors, and fatigue, the differential diagnosis remained broad and included malaria, enteric fever (typhoid or paratyphoid (The symptoms described in this case were highly suggestive of enteric fever, but one cannot distinguish on clinical grounds between S. typhi and S. paratyphi. S. paratyphi is not covered by the typhoid vaccine, and therefore should be a diagnostic consideration in vaccinated travelers.)), dengue, and Chikungunya fever. Malaria must always be considered as a common cause of fever in the returning traveler requiring hospitalization and the leading cause of death in this patient population [Speil et al 2007]. A rapid malaria test was negative, which reduced the concern for malaria, and subsequent examination of the peripheral smear showed no parasites. Another common cause of fevers in all returning travelers is dengue. However, particularly in south-central Asia to which our patient traveled, enteric fever also occurs frequently [Speil et al 2007] and must be considered promptly, given the differences in therapy. Paratyphoid and typhoid fever can be distinguished only when identified by culture. Chikungunya fever has also been reported in this region, although there was no concurrent epidemic, and our patient did not have the classic severe joint pains typically associated with infection.
In the evaluation of a returning traveler, important aspects of the history include details of the location visited (e.g. rural or urban, altitude), type of accommodation, activities, sexual exposures, food, vector and animal exposures. Pre-travel preparation, including prophylaxis and vaccination history, will inform pre-test probabilities of different diseases. Duration of travel and time until symptom onset will influence the differential diagnosis because of different pathogen’s incubation times. Other causes of illnesses, unrelated to recent travel, must also be considered [Speil et al 2007].
A specific subset of these patients who merit special consideration are those who are returning to their home region after a period of time away, also known as “travelers visiting friends and relatives” or “VFR.” Such travelers are at increased risk for illness from infectious diseases. They often stay for longer visits, in under-developed regions, and may be exposed to untreated water and local food. Additionally, these travelers are less likely to obtain pre-travel medical care with consideration of vaccinations and prophylaxis [Angell et al 2005].
This patient’s clinical presentation was typical for enteric fever. The incubation period is commonly 7-14 days (range of 3-60 days), and the onset of illness is associated with fevers and flu-like symptoms, including cough. Either constipation or diarrhea can be reported, as well as abdominal pain, nausea and headache. A rash is sometimes reported and described as subtle “rose spots” or pink, blanching macules on the trunk. Other physical findings are rare, although hepatosplenomegaly can be noted and paradoxical bradycardia is suggestive. Anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia and mild transaminase elevations are common but not diagnostic. Blood culture is the most frequent method of making the diagnosis; serology is often not dependable. Culture of the bone marrow is the most sensitive method of diagnosis [Speil et al 2007], but rarely performed in clinical practice. Complications are most common in patients who are not diagnosed within two weeks of illness and include intestinal perforation, bleeding, and encephalopathy.
Antibiotic resistance of Salmonella typhi is of increasing concern. First noted in 1989, multi-drug resistant salmonella (resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) prompted reliance on quinolones, but increasing rates of fluoroquinolone resistance are now evident [Thaver et al 2009; Effa et al 2008]. This patient was initially treated with a third-generation cephalosporin out of concern for quinolone-resistance based upon epidemiologic factors. However, after fluoroquinolone susceptibility testing was performed, her antimicrobial was changed to ciprofloxacin on hospital day 5 to complete a total of 14 days of antibiotic therapy.
Of note, typhoid fever is particularly prevalent among VFR. In studies of typhoid in the United States, 50-80% of cases occurred in returning VFR, especially from south-central Asia [Ackers et al 2000; Steinberg et al 2004]. Other areas of high risk include Mexico, Caribbean, Central and South America and regions in Africa. Vaccination rates among VFR are especially low. Vaccines, either the one-time capsular polysaccharide injectable (Vi) or five-dose oral live attenuated (Ty21a), provides 50-80% protection that lasts 2 or 5 years, respectively. The most important method of reducing infection rates is improved food and water safety [Crump et al 2010].
Additionally, this patient presented with parasitic intestinal infection with both Blastocystis homini s and Dientamoeba fragilis. The ability of both of these organisms to cause symptomatic disease is controversial, but many clinicians would treat symptomatic individuals in whom these agents are identified. Individuals with dientamoebiasis may be treated with metronidazole. A 10-day course may be only 70-80% effective and re-treatment is often employed. Iodoquinol and paromomycin may be more effective [Stark et al 2010], but are less readily available. The pathogenicity of Blastocystis has also been a subject of much debate. A randomized clinical trial demonstrated that treatment with metronidazole resulted in significant clearance of the parasite at one month. However, either recurrence or reinfection rates were high at six months post-treatment; up to 48% of patients at six month follow-up were now asymptomatic but with Blastocystis still isolated from stool culture [Nigro et al 2003].
Final Diagnosis
References
Ackers, M.L., Puhr, N.D., Tauxe, R.V., and Mintz, E.D. (2000). Laboratory-based surveillance of Salmonella serotype Typhi infections in the United States: antimicrobial resistance on the rise. JAMA 283, 2668-2673
PMID:10819949(PubMed abstract) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/destinations/bangladesh.aspx#vaccines. Accessed 7/26/10. Crump, J.A., and Mintz, E.D. (2010). Global trends in typhoid and paratyphoid Fever. Clin Infect Dis 50, 241-246.
PMID:20014951(PubMed abstract) Effa, E.E., and Bukirwa, H. (2008). Azithromycin for treating uncomplicated typhoid and paratyphoid fever (enteric fever). Cochrane Database Syst Rev, CD006083.
PMID:18843701(PubMed abstract) Health Map: Global Health, Local Information. http://www.healthmap.org/en Nigro, L., Larocca, L., Massarelli, L., Patamia, I., Minniti, S., Palermo, F., and Cacopardo, B. (2003). A placebo-controlled treatment trial of Blastocystis hominis infection with metronidazole. J Travel Med 10, 128-130
PMID:12650658(PubMed abstract) Speil, C., Mushtaq, A., Adamski, A., and Khardori, N. (2007). Fever of unknown origin in the returning traveler. Infect Dis Clin North Am 21, 1091-1113, x.
PMID:18061090(PubMed abstract) Stark, D., Barratt, J., Roberts, T., Marriott, D., Harkness, J., and Ellis, J. (2010). A review of the clinical presentation of dientamoebiasis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 82, 614-619.
PMID:20348509(PubMed abstract) Steinberg, E.B., Bishop, R., Haber, P., Dempsey, A.F., Hoekstra, R.M., Nelson, J.M., Ackers, M., Calugar, A., and Mintz, E.D. (2004). Typhoid fever in travelers: who should be targeted for prevention? Clin Infect Dis 39, 186-191
PMID:15307027(PubMed abstract) Thaver, D., Zaidi, A.K., Critchley, J., Azmatullah, A., Madni, S.A., and Bhutta, Z.A. (2009). A comparison of fluoroquinolones versus other antibiotics for treating enteric fever: meta-analysis. BMJ 338, b1865.
PMID:19493939(PubMed abstract) Angell, S.Y., and Behrens, R.H. (2005). Risk assessment and disease prevention in travelers visiting friends and relatives. Infect Dis Clin North Am 19, 49-65.
PMID:15701546(PubMed abstract)
Ackers, M.L., Puhr, N.D., Tauxe, R.V., and Mintz, E.D. (2000). Laboratory-based surveillance of Salmonella serotype Typhi infections in the United States: antimicrobial resistance on the rise. JAMA 283, 2668-2673
PMID:10819949(PubMed abstract)
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/destinations/bangladesh.aspx#vaccines. Accessed 7/26/10.
Crump, J.A., and Mintz, E.D. (2010). Global trends in typhoid and paratyphoid Fever. Clin Infect Dis 50, 241-246.
PMID:20014951(PubMed abstract)
Effa, E.E., and Bukirwa, H. (2008). Azithromycin for treating uncomplicated typhoid and paratyphoid fever (enteric fever). Cochrane Database Syst Rev, CD006083.
PMID:18843701(PubMed abstract)
Health Map: Global Health, Local Information. http://www.healthmap.org/en
Nigro, L., Larocca, L., Massarelli, L., Patamia, I., Minniti, S., Palermo, F., and Cacopardo, B. (2003). A placebo-controlled treatment trial of Blastocystis hominis infection with metronidazole. J Travel Med 10, 128-130
PMID:12650658(PubMed abstract)
Speil, C., Mushtaq, A., Adamski, A., and Khardori, N. (2007). Fever of unknown origin in the returning traveler. Infect Dis Clin North Am 21, 1091-1113, x.
PMID:18061090(PubMed abstract)
Stark, D., Barratt, J., Roberts, T., Marriott, D., Harkness, J., and Ellis, J. (2010). A review of the clinical presentation of dientamoebiasis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 82, 614-619.
PMID:20348509(PubMed abstract)
Steinberg, E.B., Bishop, R., Haber, P., Dempsey, A.F., Hoekstra, R.M., Nelson, J.M., Ackers, M., Calugar, A., and Mintz, E.D. (2004). Typhoid fever in travelers: who should be targeted for prevention? Clin Infect Dis 39, 186-191
PMID:15307027(PubMed abstract)
Thaver, D., Zaidi, A.K., Critchley, J., Azmatullah, A., Madni, S.A., and Bhutta, Z.A. (2009). A comparison of fluoroquinolones versus other antibiotics for treating enteric fever: meta-analysis. BMJ 338, b1865.
PMID:19493939(PubMed abstract)
Angell, S.Y., and Behrens, R.H. (2005). Risk assessment and disease prevention in travelers visiting friends and relatives. Infect Dis Clin North Am 19, 49-65.
PMID:15701546(PubMed abstract)
