History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Summary: An elderly man with a rash and peripheral neuropathy.
An elderly man presented with a five-month history of non-pruritic macular rash. He noted diminished sensation over the skin lesions and in the feet. He had received several topical treatments, without improvement, and denied fever or other systemic symptoms.
Past Medical History
He had hypertension. There were no known allergies.
Medications
His medications included enalapril.
Allergies
There were no known allergies.
Epidemiological History
The patient was born in Spain, and lived in a rural area of Venezuela for the previous 20 years. He was a smoker, but did not use illicit drugs or alcohol. He had several domestic animals at his home.
Physical Examination
He appeared in good health. The temperature was 95.2°F (35.1°C) and respirations 14 breaths per minute. There were several macular lesions present on his body, up to eight centimeters in diameter (Figures 1 and 2). Pain and temperature sensation were diminished over the skin lesions, the ulnar area of left hand, the right thumb, and the right foot. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Figure 2. Physical findings.
Studies
The level of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 43 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 84 IU/L and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) 463 IU/L; all other test results were normal. Results of serology testing, a chest radiograph, electrocardiogram, and abdominal ultrasound were also normal. The electromyogram showed a predominantly sensory asymmetric peripheral polyneuropathy.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A skin lesion was biopsied. Pathological examination of the skin biopsy showed a granulomatous infiltrate with numerous acid-fast bacilli, often found in large clumps, i.e. "globi". A diagnosis of leprosy was made.
Treatment and Followup
The patient received dapsone, rifampin, and clofazimine. Improvement occurred in the skin lesions over the following months.
Discussion
Leprosy, a well-known illness since the sixth century B.C., is a chronic infection caused by Mycobacterium leprae. It affects the skin, peripheral nervous system, upper respiratory tract, and eyes, and in men may involve the testicles. The disease may be transmitted from one person to another, and if left untreated may cause characteristic deformities that historically have resulted in a profound social stigma in sufferers. In the present day, leprosy can be diagnosed in early stages, and can be treated effectively, resulting in successful prevention of deformities and cure of the infection.
Final Diagnosis
Leprosy, caused by Mycobacterium leprae.
References
