History of Present Illness
Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A woman with a biphasic (Some kinds of infections can have different symptoms at different points in the illness. This can be due either to intrinsic properties of a pathogen - for example, one that begins as a local infection that later becomes systemic - or because one pathogen can increase the risk of a secondary infection with another organism.) respiratory illness.
A woman in her thirties (A patient's age is often a critical factor in infectious disease diagnosis, affecting both the spectrum of illness and type of organisms involved. Relatively few common infectious diseases make a previously healthy young adult severely ill, which can narrow the differential diagnosis of likely causes.) presented in February (Many infectious illnesses show at least some seasonality, so the time of year an illness occurs can help suggest which pathogens are more likely. Influenza has one of the most striking seasonal patterns of any common infectious disease, with high rates in the cold winter months in Northern and Southern hemispheres, while being present at low levels year-round in the tropics.) with a history of fever, and temperatures ranging between 100-101°F (37.8-38.3°C), headache, myalgias (Terminology: diffuse muscle aches.) and cough. There was no sputum production. She was breathing comfortably and the examination was normal. Laboratory testing included a normal white cell count (The total white blood cell count is often a clue to the diagnosis. Most common bacterial infections severe enough to provoke fever will usually cause an elevated white blood cell count, whereas many viral infections will not.). A chest radiograph was taken and is shown in Figure 1 (This chest radiograph shows symmetrical interstitial changes characteristic of viral or atypical infection.). She was discharged home with a diagnosis of probable influenza (For common illnesses, a diagnosis can often be made presumptively, without requiring specific testing (though currently, most people would be tested for influenza antigens, if testing is available).).
Several days later, she returned to the emergency room due to worsening symptoms, including cough productive of purulent sputum (The pattern of initial improvement from a viral infection followed days later by worsening symptoms and the development of a productive cough with purulent sputum is suggestive of secondary bacterial infection, and important complication of several viral infections, notably influenza. Terminology: Purulent means pus-producing.).
Figure 1. Chest radiograph on initial presentation.
Past Medical History
The patient had been in good health (Serious pre-existing medical illnesses such as diabetes mellitus or emphysema increase the risk and spectrum of infections and, in contrast, the differential diagnosis is narrower in a previously healthy patient.).
Medications
She had not been on medications (Medication and vaccination history is important in infectious diseases diagnosis. Recent antibiotic use and use of immunosuppressive drugs will alter the risks of certain infections.) before this illness.
Epidemiological History
The patient was from Western Europe. She resided in an urban area in New England where other residents had symptoms of a flu-like illness (Identifying clusters of cases of people with same illness is one of the key tools of infectious disease epidemiology.).
Physical Examination
The patient appeared to be in moderate respiratory distress (Trouble breathing is an extremely distressing symptom, often immediately visible when a patient is being examined. Young, healthy people have a large amount of pulmonary reserve, so any process severe enough to actually produce respiratory distress in a young person is very worrisome.). The temperature was 103°F (39.4°C). The lungs revealed diminished breath sounds and rhonchi, most notably on the right, and inspiratory rales in the left posterior lung field.
Studies
A chest radiograph obtained on her return visit, when she was admitted to the hospital, and is shown in Figure 2 (The grossly asymmetrical appearance, and dense white-out of pulmonary lobes reflect the filling of alveolar space with fluid -in this case, pus- and are highly suggestive of acute bacterial infection.).
Figure 2. Chest radiograph upon return visit.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A gram stain of the sputum specimen is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Gram stain of sputum specimen.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A gram stain of the sputum sample showed mononuclear white cells (suggestive of an underlying viral etiology), leukocytes, and gram positive cocci in clusters (Figure 3). Culture of the sputum grew abundant Staphylococcus aureus, sensitive to oxacillin (Oxacillin is a semi-synthetic beta-lactam antibiotic with good activity against many Gram-positive aerobic bacteria including Staphylococcus aureus. At the time this case occurred, oxacillin was a reasonable empiric therapy for S. aureus. Unfortunately, with the emergence of methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) - this antibiotic would no longer be used in a life-threatening infection until antibiotic sensitivity results were known.).
Treatment and Followup
The patient was treated with oxacillin and recovered fully.
Discussion
Fever, malaise, headache, myalgia and cough are the most common presenting symptoms of influenza. The physical examination is often normal except for fever, with the temperature peaking between 100°F (37.8°C) and 104°F (40.0°C), on average. The most frequent pulmonary complications of influenza are primary influenza viral pneumonia, which has a high mortality rate, and secondary bacterial infection, most commonly due to Streptococcus pneumoniae. The appearance of pneumonia caused by Staphylococcus aureus (Streptococcus pneumoniae, an organism specifically adapted to the respiratory tract, is the most common cause of community-acquired pneumonia and the most common cause of secondary bacterial pneumonia. In contrast, Staphylococcus aureus, an organism adapted to the nasal spaces and skin, is a very uncommon cause of pneumonia except when the lungs defenses are impaired, as can happen after influenza infection.) in otherwise healthy individuals may be an early indicator of an emerging Influenza A outbreak. In addition, secondary infection with community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) has been reported after influenza; in the setting of a suspected post-influenza bacterial pneumonia, empiric therapy for MRSA should be strongly considered.
Influenza is also notable for its high mortality rate, especially in the elderly and very young children, and epidemic nature. Other groups at high-risk include those with cardiovascular (especially valvular) disease, pulmonary complications (such as asthma), chronic metabolic disease, renal dysfunction, pregnancy, or immunodeficiency, including HIV infection. More recently, the 2009 H1N1 influenza A outbreak has also shown a significant rate of severe infection in previously healthy young adults. Of note, the majority of patients who contract influenza have been active and ambulatory up until the onset of illness. Early treatment of influenza may reduce the duration and severity of illness.
Additional resources for students:
1. Barry, J. 2005. The Great Influenza: The Epic Story of the Deadliest Plague in History, Penguin, October. [Excellent, non-fiction accounts of the Spanish Flu]
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) influenza website: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/flu/fluvirus.htm [clinical summaries]
3. Kolata, G. November 1999. Flu: The Story of the Great Influenza Pandemic of 1918 and the Search for the Virus That Caused It. Farrar Straus & Giroux.
4. Willis, C. August 1993. Doomsday Book, Spectra [Science fiction account of what the "next" Spanish Flu could look like, and comparison with the Plague]
5. World Health Organization (WHO) influenza website: http://www.who.int/csr/disease/influenza/en/ [outbreak tracking and vaccine status]
Final Diagnosis
Viral illness, consistent with influenza, complicated by secondary Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia.
References
