History of Present Illness
Summary: A woman in her twenties with an intra-abdominal mass during pregnancy.
A woman in her twenties presented with an abdominal mass. She was in the late third trimester of pregnancy when she began to experience sharp abdominal pain in the right lower quadrant. The pain increased when she lay on the right side.
She had no other symptoms and specifically denied fever, weight loss, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or rash. Due to the persistence of symptoms, a sonographic evaluation was performed that revealed a diaphragmatic hernia of the fetus, as well as a right-sided mass with cystic and solid components that was thought to be ovarian in origin.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen confirmed the fetal diaphragmatic hernia, as well as the complex cystic structure, which measured 12 centimeters by 6 cm. The differential diagnosis of the mass suggested by the radiographic appearance included an ovarian cyst versus tumor.
Epidemiological History
The patient had immigrated to the United States from the Middle East nearly two decades earlier and had last visited there over ten years before. She reported no recent international travel, and did not own dogs or have occupational exposure to agriculture or livestock. There was no family history of malignancy.
Physical Examination
She appeared healthy and in no distress. The temperature was 98.5°F (36.9°C), heart rate 98 beats per minute and blood pressure 108/64 mm Hg. The abdomen was gravid and not tender. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 11,700 cells/mm³ with 80% neutrophils, 14% bands, 5% monocytes and no eosinophils.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Due to the severity of the fetal hernia, she underwent caesarian section within two weeks of her presentation. She delivered an infant who was subsequently placed on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), and transferred to a pediatric hospital for further care. There was an additional intraoperative finding of a thick-walled cyst attached to the right lobe of the liver (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Intra-operative findings.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The pathology revealed a fibrous laminated cyst with lens-shaped bodies and scolices diagnostic for echinococcal infection. Figure 2 shows the outer laminar layer of the cyst, while Figure 3 confirms presence of scolices consistent with Echinococcus granulosus.
Figure 2. Stain of surgical specimen.
Figure 3. Stain of surgical specimen.
Treatment and Followup
Cyst removal was attempted but unsuccessful due to an episode of transient hypotension during which the systolic pressure decreased to 50 mm Hg. Hydrocortisone and diphenhydramine were administered, and copious irrigation with hypertonic saline was performed. Praziquantel and albendazole were administered immediately post-operatively. She remained stable, without further evidence of hemodynamic or airway compromise. She was treated with praziquantel for three days and albendazole for three months.
Discussion
Echinococcus granulosus belongs to the Taenidae family of Cestodes. It is a tapeworm that undergoes its lifecycle in two hosts, typically involving canines and livestock. The highest prevalence of echinococcal disease is in Russia, China, North Africa, Australia, and South America, as well as the Middle East.
Humans with hydatid cyst disease often have a solitary cyst, most commonly occurring in the liver. Patients usually present due to mass effect or as an incidental radiographic finding, although rupture may also occur. Leakage of cyst contents may induce an anaphylactic syndrome, as seen in this case.
Treatment depends on the size and location of the cyst(s). Therapeutic options include surgical excision, PAIR procedure (percutaneous aspiration, injection, re-aspiration), and chemotherapy (albendazole with or without praziquantel). The other considerations in the differential diagnosis are unlikely as amebiasis typically presents with a hepatic abscess that has anchovy paste-like contents. Schistosomiasis causes a pre-portal fibrosis and Echinococcus multicularis presents with an exophytic infiltrating mass.
Final Diagnosis
Echinococcal cyst (hydatid cyst disease) due to Echinococcus granulosus.
References
