History of Present Illness
A man in his 70s presented to the emergency department for several months of worsening headaches. In the past two days, he also began to experience issues with coordination and weakness in his left hand. He has had worsening of his chronic left foot drop, and new gait instability.
He reported no systemic symptoms of fevers or chills, but did describe a recent 5-pound weight loss and some mild nausea. He had no cough, chest pain, or changes in his baseline dyspnea or exercise tolerance. He reported no visual changes or photosensitivity, no genitourinary symptoms, and no complaints of abdominal pain, vomiting, or diarrhea, The remainder of his review of symptoms was negative.
Past Medical History
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; atrial fibrillation on anticoagulation; hyperthyroidism. No known drug allergies.
Medications
Albuterol inhaler; medical therapy for heart failure; methimazole.
Epidemiological History
The patient smokes cigarettes (>50 pack-year history); he does not drink alcohol or inject drugs. He has no known tuberculosis exposure history, and no history of homelessness. He lives in a house he remodeled and gardens. He has no pets or routine animal exposures. Other than traveling across the country in the past, he has not left the northeastern United States. Decades ago, he lived in Vietnam for several years.
Physical Examination
The blood pressure was 100/61 mmHg, pulse 74 beats per minute, temperature 36.1°C (97.4°F), and respirations 18 breaths per minute, SpO2 on room air was 96%. The patient was well-appearing and alert and oriented. On pulmonary exam he was noted to have bilateral coarse breath sounds. His neurological exam was notable on the left side for: impaired finger-nose-finger testing, heel-to-shin testing, and reduced (4/5) motor strength in both upper and lower extremity. The remainder of the examination, including cranial nerve testing, was normal.
Studies
Relevant laboratory findings (with units of measurement and normal reference ranges as these vary among institutions), radiology, etc.
Labs:
- White blood cell 11,200/uL (83% neutrophils, 7.8% lymphocytes, 7.5% monocytes, 0.3% eosinophils, 0.4% basophils)
- Hemoglobin 16.6 g/dL, Platelets 262,000/uL
- Procalcitonin 0.03 ng/mL
- Complete metabolic panel within normal limits
- HIV 4 th generation Ab/Ag negative
- C-reactive protein 8 mg/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate 4 mm/Hr
- Cryptococcus antigen serum negative
- Histoplasma antigen urine negative
- Coccidioides CF Ab negative
- Toxoplasma IgG negative
- Blastomyces Ab negative
- Serum protein electrophoresis M-Spike Not Observed
- Urine protein electrophoresis M-Spike Not Observed
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
While in the emergency department, the patient had a generalized tonic-clonic seizure, with spontaneous resolution. Brain magnetic resonance imaging with and without gadolinium revealed two rim-enhancing lesions in the left cerebellum and right frontal cortex concerning for malignancy (figure 1). Chest computed tomography demonstrated consolidation in the right lower lobe and patchy consolidation in the lingula and left lower lobe concerning for multifocal infection (figure 2), and positron emission tomography scan showed an incidental finding of hypermetabolic activity in the left anterior chest wall concerning for malignancy (figure 3).
The patient was taken to the operating room for excision of his left chest wall mass, with return of gross purulence. Blood cultures were obtained.
Figure 1. Figure 1a: Magnetic resonance imaging the brain with and without gadolinium, T2 fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images identifying lesions in his left cerebellum and right frontal cortex with rim-enhancement and surrounding vasogenic edema with mass effect concerning for malignancy.
Figure 2. Figure 1b: Magnetic resonance imaging the brain with and without gadolinium, T2 fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images identifying lesions in his left cerebellum and right frontal cortex with rim-enhancement and surrounding vasogenic edema with mass effect concerning for malignancy.
Figure 3. Figure 2: Computed tomography of the patient's chest showing consolidation in the right lower lobe and patchy consolidation in the lingula, left lower lobe concerning for multifocal infection.
Figure 4. Figure 3: Positron emission tomography scan showing incidental finding of a left upper chest wall hypermetabolic soft tissue mass, initially read as concerning for malignancy.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
He was transferred to our hospital for neurosurgical evaluation and subsequently underwent left occipital craniectomy. Intra-operative findings revealed a cerebellar abscess which was drained with cultures sent. Gram-positive rod bacteria grew from the aerobic blood culture bottle (figure 4). Cultures of the chest wall abscess and brain abscess grew Gram-positive rod bacteria.
Gram-positive rod bacteria in the aerobic blood culture bottle were identified as Nocardia farcinica by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF). Tests for antimicrobial susceptibility by broth microdilution methodology were performed at the New York State Department of Health and University of Texas at Tyler reference laboratories (figure 5).
Given the unusual presentation of disseminated nocardiosis in an apparently immunocompetent patient, an anti-cytokine autoantibody panel was sent to the National Institutes of Health and revealed that the patient plasma was positive for neutralizing antibody activity to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (figure 6).
Figure 5. Figure 4: Gram stain from the aerobic blood culture bottle, showing thin, filamentous, Gram-positive rods and identified as Nocardia farcinica by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF).
Figure 6. Figure 5: Abbreviated list of antimicrobial susceptibility by broth microdilution methodology from New York State Department and University of Texas at Tyler reference laboratories.
Figure 7. Figure 6: Patient plasma positive for neutralizing autoantibodies to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor.
Treatment and Followup
The transferring hospital microbiology lab reported trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) resistance by E-test. Linezolid and imipenem were reported as susceptible by E-test and amikacin was reported as susceptible by disk diffusion. The patient was started on imipenem, linezolid, and amikacin and the Nocardia isolate was sent to two reference labs for Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) approved susceptibility testing by broth microdilution (BMD).
BMD susceptibilities from the two reference labs at the New York State Department of Health (NYS-DOH) and the University of Texas (UT) at Tyler both confirmed TMP-SMX susceptibility. UT Tyler reported intermediate susceptibility to imipenem. Imipenem was discontinued and TMP-SMX started. Amikacin and linezolid were continued. He had steady clinical improvement over the next 6 weeks and was discharged to a subacute rehabilitation facility on maintenance TMP-SMX and reduced dose linezolid, two antibiotics with high central nervous system penetration. At two months follow-up in the clinic, his left-sided arm and leg weakness had improved. At five months, he continued tolerating both antibiotics, had regained his balance, and his left-sided weakness had resolved.
Discussion
We present a case of disseminated nocardiosis in a patient with no known prior history of immunodeficiency or other typical risk factors such as pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. His initial presentation of subacute pneumonia, bacteremia, and hematogenous dissemination to the brain and skin prompted further testing for autoantibodies to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), which returned positive. Our case also highlights challenges in obtaining reliable CLSI-validated BMD susceptibilities for Nocardia farcinica , a multi-drug resistant and virulent Nocardia species.
Nocardia is an aerobic Gram-positive rod with “delicate” filamentous branching and is positive on modified acid-fast staining due to cell wall mycolic acid. It is a ubiquitous environmental saprophyte. Clinical disease often affects people with immunocompromising conditions, especially recipients of solid organ transplants and patients with chronic granulomatous disease. Syndromes caused by Nocardia include pulmonary disease (approximately 63-86% of cases) from direct inhalation from the environment, cutaneous disease (8-31%) from direct primary inoculation or secondary hematogenous seeding, and central nervous system (CNS) disease primarily in the form of abscess (2-26%) and rarely as meningitis (1). When Nocardia is identified, brain imaging is often performed to screen for CNS involvement. Combination antibiotic therapy as induction therapy is recommended for cases of disseminated disease with brain involvement (2).
Patients with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) are also at high risk of pulmonary nocardiosis. PAP is a disease syndrome characterized by poor clearance and accumulation of pulmonary surfactant. It has been associated with the presence of autoantibodies to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating-factor (GM-CSF), a cytokine important in alveolar surfactant homeostasis (3). Loss of GM-CSF activity reduces alveolar macrophage phospholipid catabolism and leads to accumulation of surfactant. However, there is an emerging literature reporting patients who do not have a diagnosis of PAP but who have detectable anti-GM-CSF autoantibodies and develop disseminated nocardiosis, like in this patient (4). The presence of anti-GM-CSF autoantibodies has also been implicated in disseminated cryptococcal disease (5).
This case highlights the importance of sending Nocardia isolates to reliable reference laboratories. The transferring hospital microbiology lab used the E-test method for TMP-SMX, linezolid, and imipenem and the disk diffusion method for amikacin. E-test and disk diffusion are not validated for Nocardia . CLSI recommends using broth microdilution (BMD) performed by reference laboratories. Performance and interpretation of susceptibility testing require expertise with BMD for this organism and knowledge of the differing susceptibility patterns of Nocardia species. Laboratories which infrequently encounter Nocardia should send isolates to reference laboratories validated for these procedures and in interpreting these results. For example, certain Nocardia species grow slowly and make reading at the 72-hour mark difficult, and growth in the control well may also be poor and lead to uninterpretable MIC results (6).
Imipenem susceptibility testing can be particularly challenging as in our case where two reference laboratories reported divergent susceptibility results for this antibiotic (figure 6). Therapeutic options are limited by the multi drug-resistant nature of Nocardia farcinica and this patient’s disseminated disease. Notably, imipenem instability likely contributes to the high MIC observed in susceptibility testing for this antibiotic during prolonged incubation of Nocardia (7,8). Ultimately, confirmatory antimicrobial testing by BMD reported susceptibility to TMP-SMX, which was used in conjunction with reduced-dose linezolid as consolidation therapy with good therapeutic effect.
Testing for anti-GM-CSF autoantibodies should be considered in patients with unexplained disseminated nocardiosis and no history of overt immunodeficiencies or pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP).
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated in a presumed immunocompetent patient, found to have anti-granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating-factor autoantibodies.
References
Lafont E, Conan PL, Rodriguez-Nava V, Lebeaux D. Invasive Nocardiosis: Disease Presentation, Diagnosis and Treatment - Old Questions, New Answers? Infect Drug Resist. 2020 Dec 22;13:4601-4613.
PMID:33376366 ( PubMed abstract )
Corsini Campioli C, Castillo Almeida NE, O'Horo JC, Challener D, Go JR, DeSimone DC, Sohail MR. Clinical Presentation, Management, and Outcomes of Patients With Brain Abscess due to Nocardia Species. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2021 Apr 7;8(4).
PMID:33855101 ( PubMed abstract )
Ataya A, Knight V, Carey BC, Lee E, Tarling EJ, Wang T. The Role of GM-CSF Autoantibodies in Infection and Autoimmune Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis: A Concise Review. Front Immunol. 2021 Nov 22;12:752856.
PMID:34880857 ( PubMed abstract )
Rosen LB, Rocha Pereira N, Figueiredo C, Fiske LC, Ressner RA, Hong JC, Gregg KS, Henry TL, Pak KJ, Baumgarten KL, Seoane L, Garcia-Diaz J, Olivier KN, Zelazny AM, Holland SM, Browne SK. Nocardia-induced granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor is neutralized by autoantibodies in disseminated/extrapulmonary nocardiosis. Clin Infect Dis. 2015 Apr 1;60(7):1017-25.
PMID:25472947 ( PubMed abstract )
Kuo PH, Wu UI, Pan YH, Wang JT, Wang YC, Sun HY, Sheng WH, Chen YC, Chang SC. Neutralizing Anti-Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor Autoantibodies in Patients With Central Nervous System and Localized Cryptococcosis: Longitudinal Follow-up and Literature Review. Clin Infect Dis. 2022 Aug 25;75(2):278-287.
PMID:34718451 ( PubMed abstract )
Brown-Elliott BA, Brown JM, Conville PS, Wallace RJ Jr. Clinical and laboratory features of the Nocardia spp. based on current molecular taxonomy. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2006 Apr;19(2):259-82.
PMID:16614249 ( PubMed abstract )
Brown-Elliott BA, Killingley J, Vasireddy S, Bridge L, Wallace RJ Jr. In Vitro Comparison of Ertapenem, Meropenem, and Imipenem against Isolates of Rapidly Growing Mycobacteria and Nocardia by Use of Broth Microdilution and Etest. J Clin Microbiol. 2016 Jun;54(6):1586-1592.
PMID:27053677 ( PubMed abstract )
Lowman W, Aithma N. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing and profiling of Nocardia species and other aerobic actinomycetes from South Africa: comparative evaluation of broth microdilution versus the Etest. J Clin Microbiol. 2010 Dec;48(12):4534-40
PMID:20980572 ( PubMed abstract )
