History of Present Illness
2006 October Featured Case Summary: A man from northern Brazil with respiratory symptoms and a facial lesion.
A man in his fifties developed sore throat, dry cough, difficulty swallowing and change in his voice. Swelling around the mouth occurred, followed by the development of a lesion between the upper lip and nares. The lesion increased in size to involve the peri-oral skin and mucosa. Five years after the onset of symptoms, he presented for evaluation. He also reported fevers, night sweats and anorexia.
Past Medical History
None.
Medications
None.
Epidemiological History
The patient was born and lived in Brazil, and had worked for many years as an agricultural laborer in a rural area in the northeastern section of the country. He was in frequent contact with numerous types of domesticated animals, livestock and fresh water sources. He smoked tobacco regularly until his throat began to bother him and had previously consumed several alcoholic beverages per night.
Physical Examination
The patient's facial lesion is shown in Figure 1. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Facial findings.
Studies
There were no laboratory tests available.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The diagnosis of paracoccidioidomycosis was made by pathological examination of a wet mount swab from the lesion. The identifying features of Paracoccidioides spp. include the appearance of large fungal cells with translucent walls and multiple buddings.
Treatment and Followup
Amphotericin B was administered intravenously for four weeks and sulfamethoxazole was given orally. A treatment course of sulfamethoxazole for three to five years duration was planned.
Discussion
Paracoccidioidomycosis is an endemic dimorphic fungus of South America (from Mexico to Argentina). It is also known as South American Blastomycosis. Infection is most common in Brazil, with lower rates in Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador and Argentina, and still lower in the rest of the continent. The habitat of the fungus in nature is not known. It has rarely been isolated from soil, and has been found occasionally to infect armadillos and dogs. Endemicity appears to be centered in coffee- and tobacco-growing regions, as well as in areas with high humidity and heavy precipitation.
Most patients affected are over 30 years of age. Whereas the prevalence of infection, as determined by skin testing, suggests rates in men and women are approximately equal, the ratio of clinical disease in men to women is 15:1. Occupations related to agriculture appear to be a risk factor for disease. It does not spread from one person to another.
Paracoccidioidomycosis may remain latent for decades. Reactivation occurs in the setting of immunosuppression or malnourishment and is also associated with chronic alcohol and tobacco use. The fungus is thought to be acquired through inhalation (> 90% of those infected have lung lesions), with subsequent dissemination possible. Patients may present with a range of findings from dry cough and dyspnea to hemoptysis. The most common site of extra-pulmonary disease is the mucosa (60%), and can be seen in the mouth (lips, gingival, tongue, palate), naso- and oropharynx, and larynx. As a result, dysphonia and dysphagia are common findings. The gastrointestinal tract, from the mouth to the anus, can be affected and patients may suffer from diarrhea and emaciation. The adrenal glands, skin and reticuloendothelial system can also be sites of active infection. Constitutional symptoms such as fever, malaise and weight loss are common.
Diagnosis is often made with wet mount from sputum or purulent material arising from a lesion. Histological examination may show granulomas around yeast cells. Cultures should be incubated for six weeks.
At the time of this publication, treatment is with itraconazole or ketoconazole, with amphotericin given in severe cases. Sulfonamides are sometimes used and may have some efficacy. Investigation is ongoing into the use of posaconazole and terbinafine. Attention should also be paid to address immunosuppression, malnourishment, and the use of alcohol and tobacco.
Final Diagnosis
Paracoccidioidomycosis caused by the fungus Paracoccidioides spp in a man from Brazil.
References
Ameen M, Talhari C, Talhari S. (2010) Advances in paracoccidioidomycosis. Clin Exp Dermatol. 35(6):576-80.
PMID:19874328(PubMed abstract) Brazão-Silva MT, Andrade MF, Franco T, Ribeiro RI, Silva Wdos S, Faria G, Faria PR, Cardoso SV, Loyola AM. (2011) Paracoccidioidomycosis: a series of 66 patients with oral lesions from an endemic area. Mycoses. 2011 Jul;54(4):e189-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0507.2010.01873.x.
PMID:20406390(PubMed abstract) Restrepo A and Tobon AM, Paracoccidioides brasilienses, in Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, J.E. Bennett, R. Dolin, and G.L. Mandell, Editor. 2005, Elsevier Churchill Livingstone: Philadelphia. p.3062 - 8.
Ameen M, Talhari C, Talhari S. (2010) Advances in paracoccidioidomycosis. Clin Exp Dermatol. 35(6):576-80.
PMID:19874328(PubMed abstract)
Brazão-Silva MT, Andrade MF, Franco T, Ribeiro RI, Silva Wdos S, Faria G, Faria PR, Cardoso SV, Loyola AM. (2011) Paracoccidioidomycosis: a series of 66 patients with oral lesions from an endemic area. Mycoses. 2011 Jul;54(4):e189-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0507.2010.01873.x.
PMID:20406390(PubMed abstract)
Restrepo A and Tobon AM, Paracoccidioides brasilienses, in Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, J.E. Bennett, R. Dolin, and G.L. Mandell, Editor. 2005, Elsevier Churchill Livingstone: Philadelphia. p.3062 - 8.
