History of Present Illness
2008 May Featured Case and Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: An elderly woman with diabetes and lung disease developed fever and confusion.
A woman in her seventies (Patient age is often an important diagnostic clue, both due to different sorts of exposures as well as age-related changes in immune function. Even the the absence of concomitant illness, host immune responses to a variety of pathogens typically begins to decline slowly beyond fifty years of age. This puts patients at elevated risk for some pathogens less often seen in younger patients. It also increases the risk of reactivation disease, such as tuberculosis or herpes zoster, and decreases the immune response to vaccinations, including to influenza or pneumococcal vaccines.) was generally well until 3 days before admission when she reported to a family member that she felt stiffness between her clavicles. The following day, she spoke again with her family, and her conversation and behavior were thought to be normal. On the day before admission, she participated in social activities with residents at the senior housing complex in which she lived. The next afternoon, she was found in bed, confused, and was taken to another hospital by emergency medical services.
On examination, she was lethargic, confused, and somnolent. The temperature (Fever and mental status changes raise the issue of central nervous system infection, which needs to be addressed immediately. However, fever itself can cause some degree of altered mental status, particularly in the elderly, so this presentation should not preclude a thorough search for other sources of fever.) was 103.9°F (39.9°C). Results of tests for white blood cells and plasma levels of cardiac enzymes, including troponin, were reportedly elevated. Ceftriaxone (1 gram), moxifloxacin (In possible bacterial meningitis, rapid institution of antibiotics targeted at the most likely pathogens is essential, and failure to do so is associated with poor outcome. The regimen of ceftriaxone and moxifloxacin would not have adequately covered the possible pathogens in this case.) (400 mg), methylprednisolone (A corticosteroid anti-inflammatory agent. Since the pathophysiology of bacterial meningitis involves tissue injury due to the host inflammatory response, there is a biological rationale for giving steroids in suspected bacterial meningitis. The data are complex but currently support the use of steroids in adults for possible or proven pneumococcal meningitis. In order for them to be effective, however, they must be given very early, ideally with or before initial antibiotics.) and aspirin were administered. Computed tomography (Given the extreme rapidity of disease progression, once the issue of suspected bacterial meningitis has been raised, lumbar puncture and institution of therapy should occur immediately. There are a limited number of indications for initial CT scanning, but judging by the physical exam reported below, this patient did not meet them. Obtaining a CT scan when not indicated has been associated with delay of therapy and poorer outcomes in meningitis.) (CT) reportedly showed no evidence of acute infarction or hemorrhage. She was transferred to a tertiary care hospital.
Past Medical History
There was a history of diabetes mellitus (Co-morbid conditions are an important consideration in the infectious diseases work-up. Diabetes mellitus, in particular, increases the risk of infection, the spectrum of likely pathogens, and the likelihood of fulminant disease.), hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Medications
Daily medications included hydrochlorothiazide, glimepiride, risedronate, pioglitazone, atorvastatin, and omeprazole (The patient's medication list is a useful cross-check on the medical history. Here, the patient's hypertension and diabetes medications correspond to the history, but the presence of a statin suggests hypercholesterolemia. Omeprazole, a gastric proton-pump inhibitor, is taken by many patients for a variety of GI complaints such as ulcer disease or reflux.).
Allergies
She had no allergies.
Epidemiological History
She lived in a senior living facility. She had smoked 4 packs of cigarettes per day for many years (A very high pack-year smoking history such as this would cause concern for smoking-related illness, such as cancer with metastasis to the brain, in a patient presenting with mental status changes.), but had stopped more than 5 years earlier, and did not drink alcohol or use illicit drugs.
Four days before admission, she had attended a house party where she ate a variety of foods, and had taken some leftovers home with her. No other guest had reportedly become ill. There was no history of travel, animal exposures, or ingestion of unpasteurized (Before the advent of pasteurization, dairy products were a significant cause of food-borne illness, such as botulism. Currently, some people deliberately consume such items for perceived health benefits but, by doing so, put themselves at risk for a number of serious infections, in particular Listeriosis.) milk or cheese, or raw or uncooked meat or fish.
Physical Examination
On examination, the patient was responsive, oriented and appeared mildly agitated. The temperature was 100.7°F (38.2°C) initially, and rose to 101.9°F (38.8°C). The blood pressure was 149/72 mm Hg, pulse 117 beats per minute, and respiratory rate 28 breaths per minute, with an oxygen saturation of 100% while breathing supplemental oxygen from a non-rebreather mask. There was pain on passive flexion and extension of the neck (This finding indicates "meningismus". In combination with fever and agitation, it is highly suggestive of meningitis.), and the neck was supple with rotation. The jugulovenous pressure was 6 cm. The lungs revealed mild crackles at the left base, and breath sounds were otherwise clear. A 2/6 systolic murmur (It is important to know whether this murmur is new. Some systolic murmurs can be heard with tachycardias on occasion, but in this patient, if the murmur was new, a possible diagnosis of endocarditis with emboli to the brain should be considered. This finding emphasizes the importance of complete documentation in medical records.) was heard loudest at the base. The patient was able to follow simple commands, but speech was not fluent. Testing for cranial nerves III-XII, strength and sensation was normal, as was the remainder of the examination.
Studies
The level of D-dimer, drawn at the other hospital, was reportedly elevated. The white blood cells measured 17,700 cells per cubic millimeter (94% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 4% lymphocytes, and 2% monocytes (Although not a "hard" sign, monocytes typically fall to very low levels during severe acute bacterial infection. Their presence may suggest certain particular pathogens such as M. Tb or Listeria.)) and levels of hemoglobin and platelets were normal. An electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia, a prolonged QT interval for the rate, and diffuse ST segment and T wave abnormalities (An elderly patient with pre-existing cardiovascular disease and an acute infection will have an elevated risk of an acute cardiac event, due to the tachycardia as well as the inflammatory response.).
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Initial medications included atrovent and albuterol nebulizers, methylprednisolone (125 mg intravenously), crystalloid intravenous fluid 1.5 liters, and nitroglycerin by continuous intravenous drip. Computed tomography, performed according to a pulmonary embolism protocol, was negative.
A lumbar puncture was performed, and analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed yellow, moderately turbid fluid with 1823 white cells (Very large numbers of neutrophils in the CSF strongly support the diagnosis of acute bacterial meningitis.) (77% neutrophils, 21% lymphocytes, and 2% monocytes) and 433 red cells per cubic millimeter in the 1st tube, and 1188 white cells and 175 red cells (The presence of red cells may suggest a necrotizing process in the CSF - as is seen with HSV encephalitis - or may simply be due to trauma from the lumbar puncture. The decrease in RBC's from tube 1 to tube 4 is suggestive of the latter in this case. Sometimes these can be distinguished if the CSF shows xanthochromia, a change in color that only occurs if blood has actually entered the CSF.) per cubic millimeter in the 4th tube. The level of glucose was 124 mg/dl (The slightly elevated glucose is likely due to her diabetes, but such high levels would argue against most common bacterial pathogens such as pneumococcus, where CSF glucose levels would be very low.) (reference range 50-75 mg/dl) and protein 505 mg/dl (ref. range 5-55 mg/dl). Stain of the cytospin of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is shown in Figures 1 and 2.
Additional ceftriaxone (2 grams) was administered, and acyclovir (To cover the possibility of HSV encephalitis, where therapy must be instituted very early for maximum efficacy.) (600 mg), vancomycin (For the possibility of antibiotic-resistant pneumococcus. For meningitis, initial therapy must cover all the reasonable possibilities. One cannot wait for antibiotic sensitivity testing to guide therapy.) (1 g), and ampicillin (For Listeria coverage. This pathogen rises in incidence as a cause of meningitis after age fifty.) (2 g) were added.
Figure 1. Stain of CSF cytospin.
Figure 2. Stain of CSF cytospin.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Cultures of the CSF and blood grew Listeria monocytogenes. A gram stain of the blood culture growth is shown in Figure 3, and a subculture of the organism of a blood agar plate is shown in Figure 4. Results of polymerase chain reaction testing of the CSF were negative for Herpes simplex virus.
Figure 3. Gram stain of aerobic blood culture.
Figure 4. Culture of organism on blood agar plate.
Treatment and Followup
Broad spectrum antibiotics were administered pending the results of the CSF and blood cultures, when gentamicin (Rapid killing of bacteria with high concentrations of bactericidal antibiotics that penetrate into the CSF is the key to successful therapy of bacterial meningitis. Because ampicillin shows delayed killing of Listeria at levels achievable in the CSF, gentamicin, an aminoglycoside is often added for synergy.) was added. The patient's temperature decreased to below 100°F (37.8°C); her mental status improved; and the acyclovir, ceftriaxone, and vancomycin were stopped. The patient declined to have a repeat lumbar puncture despite continued complaints of mild headache. The ampicillin and gentamicin were continued, with a plan to treat for 2.5-3 weeks intravenously. She developed increased cardiac enzymes and associated ST elevations, which were thought to be caused by increased myocardial demand in the setting of tachycardia and infection. A beta-blocker was added to her medications. She gradually improved, and was discharged on the 15th hospital day to a rehabilitation facility to complete her course of antibiotic therapy. At follow-up in Infectious Disease clinic one month after discharge, she had returned to her baseline health and felt well.
Discussion
Listeria monocytogenes, a gram-positive bacillus and facultative anaerobe, is one of the leading causes of community-acquired meningitis in adults older than 60 years of age, infants younger than 1 month, pregnant women and immunocompromised hosts, with the highest incidence of L. monocytogenes infection occurring in the first two groups. L. monocytogenes is ubiquitous in nature, and has been isolated from many foods including, but not limited to, soft cheeses, processed delicatessen meats, and raw vegetables. Consumption of contaminated food is thought to represent the mode of transmission in most patients; vertical transmission from mother to child during or after childbirth is also thought to be responsible for neonatal infections. Incubation periods are long and may range from 11 to 70 days [Lorber 2005, Tunkel and Scheld 2005]; therefore, in isolated cases it may be difficult to identify the exact source of the bacteria.
L. monocytogenes is the only species of Listeria that is pathogenic in humans. Presenting symptoms of L. monocytogenes meningitis may include fever, altered mental status and/or headache. In one review, all patients with documented L. monocytogenes meningitis had at least one of the symptoms described above, and 28% had all three [Mylonakis et al 1998]. Listerial infection of the central nervous system may also present as an abscess and be mistaken for primary or metatstatic malignancy. Rarely a rhombencephalitis of the brainstem occurs. In these cases, CSF may be very bland, and even culture-negative.
In this patient, gram-positive bacilli were seen on the stain of cerebrospinal fluid, and the diagnosis of L. monocytogenes meningitis confirmed by culture results. However, in other clinical specimens, the organism may have a coccoid, diplococcoid or diphtheroid appearance with variable colorization on gram staining [Lorber 2005] and, consequently, identifying the causative agent may be more difficult until specific culture results are known.
Although L. monocytogenes is only the 5th leading cause of community acquired meningitis, it has the highest mortality rate [Lorber 2005, Tunkel and Scheld 2005]. The organism’s pattern of resistance to cephalosporins, a common empiric therapy for meningitis, may contribute to its high mortality rate. Consequently, it is important to consider this entity and administer appropriate antibiotics, which may include penicillin or ampicillin as well as the addition of gentamicin, in relevant patients.
Final Diagnosis
Meningitis caused by Listeria monocytogenes, and acute myocardial infarction in an elderly patient.
References
Lorber B, Chapter 204 Listeria monocytogenes in Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Edition, Elsevier 2005. Mylonakis, E., Hohmann, E.L., and Calderwood, S.B. (1998). Central nervous system infection with Listeria monocytogenes. 33 years' experience at a general hospital and review of 776 episodes from the literature. Medicine (Baltimore) 77, 313-336.
PMID:9772921(PubMed abstract) Tunkel AR and Scheld WM, Chapter 80 Acute Meningitis in Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Edition, Elsevier 2005.
Lorber B, Chapter 204 Listeria monocytogenes in Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Edition, Elsevier 2005.
Mylonakis, E., Hohmann, E.L., and Calderwood, S.B. (1998). Central nervous system infection with Listeria monocytogenes. 33 years' experience at a general hospital and review of 776 episodes from the literature. Medicine (Baltimore) 77, 313-336.
PMID:9772921(PubMed abstract)
Tunkel AR and Scheld WM, Chapter 80 Acute Meningitis in Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 6th Edition, Elsevier 2005.
