History of Present Illness
IDSA 2006 Fellows Day Case Summary: A man with HIV and AIDS and a skin rash.
A man in his twenties with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) presented with a rash of three weeks' duration. The rash started between his fingers and spread to his head, neck, back, chest and extremities. The skin lesions initially appeared as brown spots, which later turned grey. The rash was painful. On his hands, the skin was cracked and bleeding. He had fatigue and ow-grade fevers of one week's duration. There was no pruritus. The patient denied any sick contacts with a rash.
Past Medical History
There was a history of HIV infection and AIDS, with CD4 T-lymphocytes level of 4 cells/mm³ and HIV-RNA level of 92,000 copies/ml. Disseminated histoplasmosis had been diagnosed by bone marrow biopsy four months before. He also had anemia, poor adherence to medical therapy, and thrush. Several years earlier, he had had a deep venous thrombosis in the left leg.
Medications
Medications included itraconazole, dapsone, iron sulfate, azithromycin, ritonavir-lopinavir combination therapy, lamivudine and enfuvirtide.
Epidemiological History
The patient lived with his family in the United States and had pet dogs at home. He had been sexually active with men in the past, but not for several years, and had also used cocaine by inhalation in the past.
Physical Examination
The patient was a lethargic, thin male. The temperature was 99.8°F (37.7°C), blood pressure 120/70 mm Hg, pulse 148 beats per minute, and respirations 18 breaths per minute. The S1 and S2 heart sounds were rapid and in a regular rhythm, with a II/VI systolic ejection murmur at the apex. The neck was tender, with decreased range of motion secondary to rash, and there was a superficial ulcer on the left shin. Dry, raised white-grey thick plaque-like lesions were present and became confluent on the dorsum of hands, sides of face, neck, scalp, and back. The rash also affected the arms, legs, palms, soles, shaft and glans of the penis and was tender to palpation. Cracks were present on hands, with minimal erythema. (Figures 1 through 4.)
Figure 1. Physical findings, on admission.
Figure 2. Physical findings, on admission.
Figure 3. Physical findings
Figure 4. Physical findings.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 2500 cells/mm³ (27% neutrophils, 2% bands, 18% lymphocytes, 5% monocytes, and 48% eosinophils), hematocrit 21.0%, hemoglobin 6.8 g/dl, mean corpuscular volume 78 fl and platelets 63,000/mm³.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was placed in contact isolation and started on amphotericin B. The temperature rose to 103ºF (39.4°C). Blood cultures were drawn and a culture of the skin ulcer on the lower leg was obtained.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Skin biopsy revealed scabies, Sarcoptes scabiei var. hominis, shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5. Skin biopsy.
Treatment and Followup
He was treated with 5% permethrin cream and ivermectin 200 ug/kg. Petrolatum jelly with 6% sulfur was applied daily. The rash sloughed off in large sheets. Images taken in follow-up are shown in Figures 6 and 7.
The culture obtained from the shin ulcer grew methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and the blood cultures grew methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus.
He was treated with vancomycin, with sterilization of his blood cultures and resolution of his fevers. Appropriate infection control measures were taken.
Figure 6. Follow up, day 7.
Figure 7. Follow up, day 7.
Discussion
Crusted scabies is also known as Norwegian scabies, and is caused by Sarcoptes scabiei var. hominis. It was first described in 1848 in Norwegian patients with Hansen’s disease (leprosy). Risk factors include HIV infection, Hansen's disease, Down’s syndrome, leukemia, lymphoma, topical corticosteroid use, organ transplantation, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus or vasculitis.
The infection often represents the presence of thousands to millions of mites. Complications include secondary skin infections and bacteremia. It is very contagious and infection control issues must be considered.
Final Diagnosis
Crusted scabies caused by Sarcoptes scabiei var. hominis in a patient with HIV infection and AIDS.
References
