History of Present Illness
IDSA 2007 Fellows Day Case Submission Summary: A man with HIV infection and AIDS and fever, weight loss, and lymphadenopathy.
A male in his forties with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and AIDS, on highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART), presented with a 3-month history of fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, progressive weight loss, and swollen lymph nodes in the neck, axilla, and groin.
Past Medical History
There was a history of HIV-1 infection, cryptococcal meningitis, herpes zoster, hypertension, chronic renal insufficiency, and transfusion-dependent anemia. The most recent CD4 T-lymphocyte count was 152 cells/mm³ and the HIV-1 RNA level was less than 50 copies/mL.
Medications
Medications included abacavir/lamivudine, efavirenz, fluconazole, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and diltiazem.
Epidemiological History
He worked in an office setting, was sexually active with men only and was currently in a monogamous relationship. He smoked cigarettes and occasionally marijuana. There was no history of alcohol abuse, injection drug use, pet exposures, or recent travel.
Physical Examination
The patient was cachectic and appeared ill. The temperature was 100.5°F (38.1°C). The other vital signs were normal. There was tender, fixed bilateral lymphadenopathy in the preauricular, submandibular, supraclavicular, axillary, and inguinal regions. Edema was present at both ankles. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white cell count was 5,900 cells/mm³ with a normal differential, hematocrit 23.4%, and platelets 221,000/mm³. The creatinine was 2.8 mg/dL with a glomerular filtration rate of 26 mL per minute. Albumin was 1.6 g/dL. Other routine laboratory test results were normal.
Computed tomography (CT) of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis (with the administration of oral contrast) revealed innumerable pathologically enlarged lymph nodes, within the supraclavicular, subpectoral, and axillary regions bilaterally. The largest node measured 3.3 cm in diameter (see Figure 1). Within the abdomen, the liver and spleen were diffusely enlarged, and the gastrohepatic and gastrosplenic lymph nodes were also enlarged (see Figure 2). In addition, numerous lymph nodes were enlarged within the retroperitoneal region, extending along both iliac chain, throughout the pelvis, and into the inguinal regions (Figure 3).
Figure 1. CT scan of chest.
Figure 2. CT scan of abdomen.
Figure 3. CT scan of pelvis.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
An excisional biopsy of five inguinal lymph nodes was performed. Figures 4 and 5 reveal hematoxylin and eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining, respectively.
Figure 4. Hematoxylin and eosin stain of lymph node.
Figure 5. Immunohistochemical stain of lymph node.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Five enlarged lymph nodes in the right axillary region were excised. Pathological examination of the axillary lymph node tissue with hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) staining (Figures 4 and 6) revealed regressively transformed germinal centers rimmed by lymphocytes (A), hyperplastic vessels with hyaline changes (B) and interfollicular areas with dense infiltrates of plasmacytes (C). Immunohistochemical stain demonstrated mantle zone positivity, characteristic of Castleman's disease (see Figure 5).
Figure 6. H and E stain of lymph node biopsy.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was discharged, referred to oncology as an outpatient and started on chemotherapy. Several weeks later, he presented to the emergency room in acute respiratory distress with severe hypotension. He was intubated and started on pressors. Chest radiography showed infiltrates in the right middle lobe and left lower lobe.
Maximal amounts of pressors were administered, however, he remained hypotensive and developed pulseless electrical activity. Despite attempts at resuscitation, he expired.
Discussion
Multicentric Castleman's disease (CD) is a rare clinicopathological entity that presents with fever, widespread lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and peripheral edema. There is also a localized, or unicentric, form of the disease.
Many HIV-positive patients with multicentric CD also have Kaposi’s sarcoma. Human herpes virus 8 (HHV8) has been detected in all cases studied. At this writing, no standardized treatment is available. However options include chemotherapy, anti-virals against HHV8, anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, and interferon alpha. The role of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in the treatment of CD is uncertain.
Final Diagnosis
Castleman’s disease in a patient with HIV infection and AIDS.
References
Collins, L.S., Fowler, A., Tong, C.Y., and de Ruiter, A. (2006). Multicentric Castleman's disease in HIV infection. Int J STD AIDS 17, 19-24; quiz 25.
PMID:16409673(PubMed abstract) Herrada, J., Cabanillas, F., Rice, L., Manning, J., and Pugh, W. (1998). The clinical behavior of localized and multicentric Castleman disease. Ann Intern Med 128, 657-662
PMID:9537940(PubMed abstract) Lachant, N.A., Sun, N.C., Leong, L.A., Oseas, R.S., and Prince, H.E. (1985). Multicentric angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia (Castleman's disease) followed by Kaposi's sarcoma in two homosexual males with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Am J Clin Pathol 83, 27-33.
PMID:3871303(PubMed abstract) Oksenhendler, E., Duarte, M., Soulier, J., Cacoub, P., Welker, Y., Cadranel, J., Cazals-Hatem, D., Autran, B., Clauvel, J.P., and Raphael, M. (1996). Multicentric Castleman's disease in HIV infection: a clinical and pathological study of 20 patients. AIDS 10, 61-67.
PMID:8924253(PubMed abstract)
Collins, L.S., Fowler, A., Tong, C.Y., and de Ruiter, A. (2006). Multicentric Castleman's disease in HIV infection. Int J STD AIDS 17, 19-24; quiz 25.
PMID:16409673(PubMed abstract)
Herrada, J., Cabanillas, F., Rice, L., Manning, J., and Pugh, W. (1998). The clinical behavior of localized and multicentric Castleman disease. Ann Intern Med 128, 657-662
PMID:9537940(PubMed abstract)
Lachant, N.A., Sun, N.C., Leong, L.A., Oseas, R.S., and Prince, H.E. (1985). Multicentric angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia (Castleman's disease) followed by Kaposi's sarcoma in two homosexual males with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Am J Clin Pathol 83, 27-33.
PMID:3871303(PubMed abstract)
Oksenhendler, E., Duarte, M., Soulier, J., Cacoub, P., Welker, Y., Cadranel, J., Cazals-Hatem, D., Autran, B., Clauvel, J.P., and Raphael, M. (1996). Multicentric Castleman's disease in HIV infection: a clinical and pathological study of 20 patients. AIDS 10, 61-67.
PMID:8924253(PubMed abstract)
