History of Present Illness
2010 March Featured Case Summary: A man in his seventies with fevers and confusion.
A man in his seventies (Patient age helps guide differential diagnosis. For example, a patient over 70 with fever and central nervous system symptoms would have a higher prior odds of having HSV encephalitis, West Nile Virus Encephalitis, or Listeria Meningitis than a younger patient.]) presented in autumn (Several important infections show pronounced seasonality, with insect-borne pathogens in particular common in late Summer and early Autumn, when insect bites are more common.) with fevers to 101°F (38.3°C), chills, sweats, fatigue, malaise, rigors and headache. The headache was severe, and located predominantly in the frontal and temporal regions on the left side. He remained in bed for several days (The tempo of progression of symptoms has great diagnostic value. Most typical bacterial central nervous system infections progress over hours whereas viral, fungal, and atypical bacterial pathogens provoke illness more slowly.) because of his symptoms. On the fourth day, he was unable to recall the name of a close friend and the content of his speech was incoherent, without slurred speech. His wife brought him to a hospital because of increased confusion (The combination of fever, headache, and changes in mental status would satisfy the clinical criteria for encephalitis - that is, inflammation of the brain itself - in comparison to meningitis, where there is typically a stiff neck but intact mental status early in infection. Fever itself can cause some degree of confusion but usually only at much higher temperatures.). He reportedly denied dizziness, diplopia, blurry vision, cough, sore throat, runny nose, dyspnea, sputum production, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain or urinary symptoms.
On evaluation, the temperature was 97.4°F (36.3°C), pulse 65 beats per minute and blood pressure 125/84 mm Hg. He was awake and oriented, without focal neurologic findings. The white cell count was 8100 cells per cubic millimeter (90% leukocytes, 5% lymphocytes, 5% monocytes), hematocrit 41.7%, and platelets 164,000 per cubic millimeters; the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 7 mm per hour and the level of sodium was 131 mmol/L. Tests of liver and renal function were reportedly normal. Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) of the head without contrast administration were reportedly normal. He was admitted to the hospital and vancomycin, ceftriaxone and doxycycline (In a patient with fever and mental status changes, antibiotics are often given initially even if the diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is unlikely, because even brief delays in treatment can greatly increase mortality. The antibiotics are stopped once cultures are negative and-or another diagnosis is made. Vancomycin and ceftriaxone would be empiric therapy for typical bacterial meningitis, whereas doxycycline would treat a number of atypical infections such a Lyme meningitis.) were administered. A lumbar puncture was attempted but was not successful. The next day, his symptoms had improved and he appeared less confused.
On the 3rd day, the headache returned gradually in the morning, followed by an abrupt increase in confusion and disorientation, associated with stable vital signs and transient weakness on the right side. CT of the head reportedly revealed a possible aneurysm (11 mm) in the territory of the left middle cerebral artery. A rapid test of a nasal swab for influenza and blood tests for Ehrlichia and Babesia were negative. Cultures of the blood from admission were sterile. Acyclovir (Acyclovir is a drug that inhibits the DNA polymerase of Herpes Viruses. Early empiric administration of acyclovir when there is suspicion for HSV CNS infection is critical, since without it rates of death or long-term neurological deficits are greatly increased.) and levetiracetam (an anti-convulsant) were added. While awaiting transfer to a tertiary hospital, he became obtunded, arousable to painful stimuli only, with intermittent bradycardia. The trachea was intubated electively and the patient was sedated; labetolol was administered in transport for transient elevations of systolic blood pressure up to 200 mm Hg.
Past Medical History
There was a history of coronary artery disease and hyperlipidemia. He had had prostate cancer (status post radiation), skin cancer, and surgery for spinal stenosis.
Medications
Medications at the other hospital included vancomycin, ceftriaxone, doxycycline, and acyclovir, intravenously, and levetiracetam. Medications taken before admission included clopidogrel bisulfate, simvastatin, trazodone, ropinirole, meloxicam, acetylsalicylic acid, nitroglycerin tablets and multivitamins. He had received an influenza vaccine within the month, and a pneumococcal vaccine (Vaccine history is important to obtain in all patients with suspected infection. In this case the pneumococcal vaccine was given to decrease the risk of future infection, but it would not have had time to affect the course of the current illness if the patient had an ongoing infection with this organism.) had been given at the other hospital.
Allergies
He had no allergies.
Family History
A sibling had had a stroke, and there was otherwise no other family history of neurological disease.
Social History
He lived with his wife.
Epidemiological History
He moved seasonally between New England and the southern United States, and had recently returned from a cross-country motor vehicle trip between the Midwest and California (Travel history is an important and too-often overlooked part of the infectious disease work-up. Fever and headache in a person with recent travel to California would raise the question of coccidiomycosis.). He had stopped smoking and drinking alcohol years earlier, and had not used illicit drugs.
Physical Examination
The patient was sedated and intubated. The temperature was 98.3°F (36.8°C), blood pressure 164/68 mm Hg, pulse 56 beats per minute, respirations 16 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation 100% while ventilated with 100% oxygen. The skin had multiple puncture marks on the back consistent with lumbar puncture attempts and was otherwise normal. After 1 hour off sedation, the patient did not open his eyes to voice or painful stimuli; he did withdraw his limbs to painful stimuli. He intermittently moved his mouth and bit down on the endotracheal tube, and did not follow commands. The eyes were roving and did have some movement across midline when held open for examination. Plantar reflexes were extensor.
Studies
The white count was 9600 (The normal white blood cell count would argue against acute bacterial infection, although it would be important to check the white cell differential, since there can be low or normal total counts in the setting of peripheral destruction of white cells.) /mm³ (ref 4500-11,000) and hematocrit 34.6% (ref 41.0-53.0). The serum sodium was 126 mmol/L (ref 135-145), chloride 94 mmol/L (ref 100-108), glucose 140 mg/dL (ref 70-110); levels of other electrolytes, troponin-T, C-reactive protein, tests of coagulation, renal and liver function and urinalysis were normal.
A chest radiograph demonstrated left lower lobe atelectasis or consolidation consistent with a left perihilar aspiration or pneumonia (Patients will often have findings unrelated to the principal acute illness, which can sometimes confuse the work-up. In this patient with profound mental status changes and minor chest radiographic findings, it is quite unlikely that he has a significant pneumonia, although people with depressed consciousness may aspirate and develop secondary infection. A useful general principal is that immunocompetent people usually present with one significant infection at a time, and one should be suspicious of multiple diagnoses) (Figure 1). Computed tomography (CT) and CT angiogram of the head revealed a hyperdense lesion in the left anteromedial temporal lobe (1.2 cm by 1 cm) that was thought to be suspicious for a hematoma (Figures 2 and 3, see arrows), without vasogenic edema, evidence of an aneurysm or vascular malformation.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph on admission.
Figure 2. CT of the head.
Figure 3. CT of the head, reformatted.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
He was admitted to the Neurology intensive care unit. An electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges, which were more prominent on the right side, without electrographic seizure activity. Doxycycline was stopped and ampicillin (Ampicillin was added to cover the possibility of Listeria meningitis, which could present this way in a patient of his age.) and phenytoin were added.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), with the administration of gadolinium-based contrast was performed; fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), T2-weighted, and T1-post contrast enhancement images are shown in Figures 4 through 6.
A lumbar puncture was performed by interventional radiologists under fluoroscopy. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was clear and colorless, and revealed 292 red cells (Red blood cells in a CSF sample may simply indicate small trauma during the procedure, but also raise the possibility of a necrotic process, such as HSV infection. One can sometimes distinguish between a traumatic tap and true bleeding into the CSF by whether xanthochromia is present, a color change which occurs only after the red cells have been present for some time in the CSF.) and 104 white cells per cubic millimeter (Normal CSF should have 0-5 WBCs. Most bacterial meningitis would show over a thousand WBCs, nearly all neutrophils. In this patient, a hundred WBCs that are predominantly lymphocytes - a lymphocytic pleocytosis - would suggest viral infection.) (83% lymphocytes and 17% monocytes) in tube 1, with similar results in tube 4. The level of glucose was 78 mg/dl (ref 50-75) and protein 67 mg/dl (ref 5-55). Gram stain of the CSF (Gram stain of the CSF is the key initial step in ruling out bacterial meningitis. Culture and other specialized data will not be available until the next day, but the Gram stain can be done in minutes. Gram stain data are very important in guiding the initial therapy for many serious bacterial infections.) showed rare polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and moderate mononuclear cells and red blood cells.
Figure 4. MRI of the head, FLAIR.
Figure 5. MRI of the head, T2-weighted.
Figure 6. MRI of the head, T1 post contrast enhancement.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
MRI of the brain revealed medial temporal lobe (Unilateral temporal lobe inflammation with hemorrhage are common findings with HSV1 encephalitis, since these viruses reactivate from latent sites in the nearby Trigeminal ganglia.) T2 hyperintense signal and enhancement, left greater than right, with evidence of hemorrhage (Figures 4, 5 and 6). Testing of the CSF by DNA melting curve analysis (HSV diagnosis is most often made by PCR of CSF, but some centers use Real-Time PCR techniques such as melting curve analysis, which can give results more quickly and with less sample manipulation.) was positive for herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and negative for HSV type 2 (Figure 7, where 'A' and 'B' represent control samples with both HSV-1 and HSV-2 DNA, and 'C' represents the patient's CSF specimen. The HSV-1 peak is on the left of the graph and HSV-2 on the right).
No organisms were seen on gram stain of the CSF, and bacterial cultures of the CSF and blood were sterile. Testing of the CSF and serum for antibodies (immunoglobulin M) to West Nile and Eastern Equine Encephalitis viruses was negative. Testing of the serum for antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and for nucleic acid of varicella zoster virus (VZV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) were also negative.
Figure 7. Graph of DNA melting curve analysis. The 'A' and 'B' curves represent control samples with both HSV-1 and HSV-2 DNA present, and the 'C' curve represents the patient's CSF specimen, demonstrating that only HSV-1 DNA is present.
Treatment and Followup
After the results of the CSF analysis were known, vancomycin, ceftriaxone, and ampicillin were discontinued and acyclovir continued. The trachea was extubated on the 5th day. Complications during his recovery included mild syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH), with a sodium level that decreased to 133 mmol/L; this responded to administration of 3% hypertonic saline and fluid restriction. He was discharged on the 12th hospital day to a rehabilitation facility.
At follow-up 5 weeks later, he had some residual short-term memory and word-finding difficulties, but was reported by his wife to be continuing to improve.
Discussion
Encephalitis is a potentially fatal illness, for which the etiology is never identified in up to two-thirds of patients [Beckham and Tyler 2009]. When a causative agent of sporadic encephalitis in adults has been determined, viruses were the most frequently identified, occurring in approximately 38-69% of cases [Beckham and Tyler 2009]; among these cases, herpes simplex virus (HSV), is among the most often identified, occurring in up to 32% [Beckham and Tyler 2009]. HSV encephalitis occurs in approximately 1 in 250,000 individuals per year in the United States [Schiffer and Corey 2009]. HSV-1 is responsible for approximately 95% of all cases of HSV encephalitis, but among newborns, HSV-2 is more common, caused by vertical transmission from the mother. The age distribution of HSV-1 encephalitis is bi-modal, with about one third of all cases in patients younger than 20 years of age, and fifty percent in those greater than 50 years [Kimberlin 2007].
Transmission of herpes simplex virus occurs through close contact with a person shedding the virus from a lesion, leading to inoculation at a mucosal site such as the oropharynx or genital tract, with most primary episodes occurring after incubation periods of 5 days or less. [Schiffer and Corey 2009] Once infection is established, the virus travels to the nerve root ganglia and replication, which is a characteristic of primary infection, generally ceases. Viral DNA, however, can still be recovered from the nerve root ganglia [Schiffer and Corey 2009]. The precise mechanism of reactivation is not fully understood. Studies have shown that CD8+ T-lymphocytes can block reactivation [Decman et al 2005]. Patients with defects in cell-mediated immunity, such as those with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, are at risk for disseminated disease.
The reactivation process is now known to be much more common than had been thought previously. Once reactivation occurs, it can be subclinical, produce a local lesion, or be associated with disseminated disease, such as occurs in the case of HSV encephalitis. In patients with HSV encephalitis, reactivation is often in the trigeminal ganglion and spreads along the orbitofrontal and temporal meningeal branches of the 5th cranial nerve to the anterior and middle cranial fossa [Patel et al 2009].
The majority (97-100%) of patients presenting with HSV encephalitis have altered mental status and depressed consciousness, which makes it difficult to obtain an accurate history. Other signs and symptoms include headaches (70-81%) and fever (90-100%) along with cranial nerve deficits, seizures, dysphasia and aphasia [Beckham and Tyler 2009]. Behavioral findings, such as hypomania, have been described [Fisher 1996]. Kluver-Bucy Syndrome (KBS) - characterized by inappropriate behavior, memory loss, seizures and dementia and thought to be secondary to damage to both anterior temporal lobes of the brain - has been associated with herpes encephalitis, as well as to trauma to these regions.
Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with HSV encephalitis has demonstrated a pleocytosis in 96%, with a lymphocytic predominance. Red blood cells may be present in the CSF if the encephalitis has caused necrosis; if red cells are present, it is not necessary to search for another cause. This finding is not specific for HSV encephalitis however; other, much more rare, causes of hemorrhaghic encephalitis include anthrax and amebic infection. The level of protein may be abnormal, as seen in this case, while the glucose is normal in about 95% of cases [Beckham and Tyler 2009]. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of the CSF for HSV DNA is highly sensitive (98%) and specific (94%), though false negatives can rarely occur.
Classic imaging findings include inflammation and necrosis of the medial temporal lobes, as demonstrated in this case, and orbital surfaces of the frontal lobes. Bilateral involvement is common [Patel 2009]. The classic EEG pattern includes periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges (PLED’s), as in this case.
Altered mental status and fever, though common presenting features of HSV encephalitis, are also non-specific, and thus clinicians should consider a broad differential in a patient for whom HSV encephalitis is a leading diagnosis. Encephalitis caused by other viruses - including enterovirus, influenza, adenovirus, cytomegalovirus (CMV), varicella zoster virus (VZV), Epstein Barr virus (EBV), West Nile virus and Eastern Equine encephalitis virus - often needs to be considered. Among non-viral infectious etiologies, neurosyphilis and brain abscesses may present with fever and confusion. Among non-infectious etiologies, autoimmune disorder, paraneoplastic disease and collagen vascular disorders should be considered [Beckham and Tyler 2009].
Early treatment with acyclovir is essential to improve clinical outcomes, and should be initiated in individuals with a suspicion of HSV encephalitis until confirmatory data is obtained. Of note, acyclovir-resistant HSV has been described in a small percentage (about 0.1-0.7%) of immunocompetent hosts, and is more commonly seen in immunocompromised hosts, where the prevalence is 4-14% [Aoki et al 2009]. Mortality associated with HSV encephalitis remains high and is associated with older age. Those who survive often have residual memory deficits and seizure disorder.
Final Diagnosis
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 encephalitis.
References
Aoki FY, Hayden FG and Dolin R. Antiviral Drugs (Other than Antiretrovirals) in Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, edited by GL Mandell, JE Bennett and R Dolin, 7th edition, 2009. Beckham JD and Tyler KL. Chapter 87 Encephalitis. In Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, edited by GL Mandell, JE Bennett and R Dolin, 7th edition, 2009. pp 1243-1263 Decman, V., Kinchington, P.R., Harvey, S.A., and Hendricks, R.L. (2005). Gamma interferon can block herpes simplex virus type 1 reactivation from latency, even in the presence of late gene expression. J Virol 79, 10339-10347.
PMID:16051826(PubMed abstract) Fisher, C.M. (1996). Hypomanic symptoms caused by herpes simplex encephalitis. Neurology 47, 1374-1378.
PMID:8960713(PubMed abstract) Kimberlin DW. Management of HSV Encephalitis in Adults and Neonates: Diagnosis, Prognosis and Treatment, Herpes 14; 1 (2007): 11-15. Patel MR. Herpes Encephalitis: Imaging. Emedicine, 2009, accessed March 8. 2010. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/341142-overview Schiffer JT and Corey L. Chapter 136 Herpes Simplex Virus. In Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, edited by GL Mandell, JE Bennett and R Dolin, 7th edition, 2009. pp 1943-1962.
Aoki FY, Hayden FG and Dolin R. Antiviral Drugs (Other than Antiretrovirals) in Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, edited by GL Mandell, JE Bennett and R Dolin, 7th edition, 2009.
Beckham JD and Tyler KL. Chapter 87 Encephalitis. In Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, edited by GL Mandell, JE Bennett and R Dolin, 7th edition, 2009. pp 1243-1263
Decman, V., Kinchington, P.R., Harvey, S.A., and Hendricks, R.L. (2005). Gamma interferon can block herpes simplex virus type 1 reactivation from latency, even in the presence of late gene expression. J Virol 79, 10339-10347.
PMID:16051826(PubMed abstract)
Fisher, C.M. (1996). Hypomanic symptoms caused by herpes simplex encephalitis. Neurology 47, 1374-1378.
PMID:8960713(PubMed abstract)
Kimberlin DW. Management of HSV Encephalitis in Adults and Neonates: Diagnosis, Prognosis and Treatment, Herpes 14; 1 (2007): 11-15.
Patel MR. Herpes Encephalitis: Imaging. Emedicine, 2009, accessed March 8. 2010. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/341142-overview
Schiffer JT and Corey L. Chapter 136 Herpes Simplex Virus. In Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, edited by GL Mandell, JE Bennett and R Dolin, 7th edition, 2009. pp 1943-1962.
