History of Present Illness
2008 ICAAC/IDSA Fellows' Day Case Presentation Summary: A man in his eighties with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease developed increased cough and dyspnea.
A man in his eighties, with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) developed recurrent fevers, cough and dyspnea. Approximately 3 weeks earlier, in the autumn, respiratory symptoms, including productive cough and dyspnea had developed, associated with fevers. A chest radiograph revealed bilateral pulmonary infiltrates, and he was admitted to the hospital. Urinary Legionella antigen testing was positive. Moxifloxacin was administered for 14 days. He did not require intubation, and was transferred to a skilled nursing facility upon discharge.
One week before this presentation, the initial symptoms had resolved and the antibiotics were completed. Two days before admission, increasing dyspnea and cough, with minimal sputum production, developed. The night before admission, his temperature rose to 102.0°F (38.9°C). He was re-admitted to the hospital.
Past Medical History
Before his recent illness, he had not had any exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or required steroids, during the previous year. There was also a history of transitional cell bladder cancer, with resection and creation of an ileal conduit more than a decade earlier, and chronic kidney disease. He had no allergies to medications.
Medications
Medications on admission included albuterol and tiotropium inhalers, aspirin (81 mg daily), and esomeprazole (20 mg daily).
Allergies
He had no allergies to medications.
Family History
He had lived with his wife in the community until his admission 3 weeks earlier.
Epidemiological History
The patient had smoked tobacco for more than 60 years. There was no significant alcohol use, and he did not use illicit drugs. After his recent discharge, he had lived in skilled nursing facility. There was no recent travel, or exposure to tuberculosis. He had a pet cat at home.
Physical Examination
He was alert and oriented, and appeared in mild to moderate distress, with accessory muscle use. The temperature was 38.2°C (100.8°F), pulse 79 beats per minute, blood pressure 126/55 mm Hg, respirations 31 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation 95% while breathing 50% inspired oxygen by ventilation mask. The tongue was dry, with several vesicular ulcerations. There was also a large vesicle on his posterior pharynx, and an ulcerated area of skin (4 cm in length) extending inferiorly from the corner of his mouth. Auscultation of the lungs revealed decreased breath sounds in all lung fields and bibasilar crackles. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 11,600 cells per cubic millimeter, with 60% polymorphonuclear cells, 22% band forms, 5% lymphocytes, 6% monocytes, 5% eosinophils, 1% basophils, and 1% atypical lymphocytes. The creatinine was 1.4 mg/dL (reference range 0.7-1.5 mg/dL), and the potassium was 2.9 mmol/L (reference range 3.3-5.3 mmol/L). The other initial laboratory results were normal, including levels of the remaining electrolytes, glucose and tests of liver function. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest (Figures 1 and 2) revealed diffuse lymphadenopathy in the mediastinal and hilar areas, marked emphysematous changes, and pleural effusions with adjacent compressive atelectasis and infiltrates within the hemithoraces. The upper lobes demonstrated a more interstitial pattern than the lower lobes.
Figure 1. CT of the chest.
Figure 2. CT of the chest.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Vancomycin, ciprofloxacin, and piperacillin-tazobactam were administered empirically for treatment of a possible hospital-acquired pneumonia. Hypoxia and respiratory distress increased, and he was transferred to a step-down unit for closer observation; he did not require intubation. On the 3rd day, fevers and hypoxia persisted, and chest radiographs revealed increasing infiltrates despite broad-spectrum antibiotics. Piperacillin-tazobactam was stopped, and meropenem and acyclovir were added empirically.
Bronchoscopy with alveolar lavage (BAL) did not reveal any abnormalities on gross examination. Examination of the aspirate with gram stain showed few polymorphonuclear cells and no organisms. Cytopathological examination of the BAL specimen is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. BAL cytopathology.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Direct fluorescent antigen of the oral ulcer was positive for herpes simplex virus (HSV), type-1. Bacterial cultures from the aspirate were sterile, but cytopathologic examination of a specimen from the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) showed evidence of HSV invasion with multinucleated giant cells (Figure 3). Viral culture from the BAL was positive for HSV, type 1.
Treatment and Followup
The fevers resolved, and the respiratory symptoms and hypoxia slowly improved. A two-week course of acyclovir and meropenem were administered. He was discharged back to the skilled nursing facility on minimal supplemental oxygen. Two months later, a chest CT scan showed minimal residual bilateral infiltrates and reduction of the mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy.
Discussion
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) is a double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) virus. The clinical presentation of HSV pneumonia or pneumonitis is uncommon in immunocompetent hosts, unless the patient is intubated. HSV pneumonia more typically occurs in transplant recipients, burn victims, and other immunosuppressed patients. HSV infections in the lower respiratory tract have also been associated with adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and mechanical ventilation. It is difficult to determine the incidence of HSV-1, lower respiratory tract infections given the occurrence of colonization in some individuals. HSV-1 was present in 2.7% of lower respiratory specimens of critically ill patients in one study [Camps et al 2002] and was associated with higher mortality in patients with ARDS in another study (60% mortality when HSV-1 was isolated versus 45% when HSV-1 was not isolated) [Tuxen et al 1982]. Clinical features of HSV pneumonia include fever, bronchospasm, cough, leukocytosis and persistent unexplained hypoxemia. Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the pathogenesis of HSV pneumonia, including aspiration, contiguous spread (which may be supported by the presence of oral lesions and/or a history of tracheal intubation), hematogenous transmission, and possible direct tracheobronchial spread of reactivated virus originally present in vagal ganglia. Bronchoscopy may show edema, erythema, secretions, ulcers, exudative membrane, or can be completely normal. Chest radiographs most commonly show scattered areas of consolidation and ground glass opacities, but there is no characteristic pattern. Isolation of the virus in tissue culture or by direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) testing is rapid, but does not distinguish between infection and colonization. Cytological examination, with characteristic multinucleated cells and ground-glass intra-nuclear inclusion bodies, is the most specific test, but is not very sensitive. At the time of this publication, there are no guidelines or randomized controlled studies for the treatment of HSV pneumonia. In immunocompromised hosts with evidence of parenchymal invasion or clinical deterioration, acyclovir treatment is generally recommended. In normal hosts, or critically ill patients without the factors noted above, treatment guidelines are not as clearly established.
Final Diagnosis
Herpes simplex virus, type 1, (HSV-1) pneumonia.
References
Camps, K., Jorens, P.G., Demey, H.E., Pattyn, S.R., and Ieven, M. (2002). Clinical significance of herpes simplex virus in the lower respiratory tract of critically ill patients. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 21, 758-759.
PMID:12415478(PubMed abstract) Cunha, B.A., Eisenstein, L.E., Dillard, T., and Krol, V. (2007). Herpes simplex virus (HSV) pneumonia in a heart transplant: diagnosis and therapy. Heart Lung 36, 72-78.
PMID:17234480(PubMed abstract) Simoons-Smit, A.M., Kraan, E.M., Beishuizen, A., Strack van Schijndel, R.J., and Vandenbroucke-Grauls, C.M. (2006). Herpes simplex virus type 1 and respiratory disease in critically-ill patients: Real pathogen or innocent bystander? Clin Microbiol Infect 12, 1050-1059.
PMID:17002604(PubMed abstract) Tuxen, D.V., Cade, J.F., McDonald, M.I., Buchanan, M.R., Clark, R.J., and Pain, M.C. (1982). Herpes simplex virus from the lower respiratory tract in adult respiratory distress syndrome. Am Rev Respir Dis 126, 416-419.
PMID:6289702(PubMed abstract)
Camps, K., Jorens, P.G., Demey, H.E., Pattyn, S.R., and Ieven, M. (2002). Clinical significance of herpes simplex virus in the lower respiratory tract of critically ill patients. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 21, 758-759.
PMID:12415478(PubMed abstract)
Cunha, B.A., Eisenstein, L.E., Dillard, T., and Krol, V. (2007). Herpes simplex virus (HSV) pneumonia in a heart transplant: diagnosis and therapy. Heart Lung 36, 72-78.
PMID:17234480(PubMed abstract)
Simoons-Smit, A.M., Kraan, E.M., Beishuizen, A., Strack van Schijndel, R.J., and Vandenbroucke-Grauls, C.M. (2006). Herpes simplex virus type 1 and respiratory disease in critically-ill patients: Real pathogen or innocent bystander? Clin Microbiol Infect 12, 1050-1059.
PMID:17002604(PubMed abstract)
Tuxen, D.V., Cade, J.F., McDonald, M.I., Buchanan, M.R., Clark, R.J., and Pain, M.C. (1982). Herpes simplex virus from the lower respiratory tract in adult respiratory distress syndrome. Am Rev Respir Dis 126, 416-419.
PMID:6289702(PubMed abstract)
