History of Present Illness
Summary: A woman returned from Costa Rica with skin lesions.
Ten days before her presentation, a woman returned from a two-week vacation in Costa Rica. While there, she had traveled in a rainforest and jungle and had sustained multiple mosquito bites. After her return to the United States, two bites on her right leg and one on her left anterior chest had become enlarged and painful. She was seen by her primary care physician, who had prescribed doxycycline.
Past Medical History
She was previously in good health.
Medications
Doxycycline.
Allergies
She had no known allergies.
Epidemiological History
See HPI.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared well. She was afebrile. A furuncular lesion on her left infraclavicular chest was draining serous fluid from a central opening. There was surrounding erythema, edema and a few small bullae. One enlarged, painful node was palpated in her left axilla. On the right anterior calf, there were two additional draining furuncular lesions with central openings, with minimal surrounding erythema. All three lesions had central pores and observation through the openings disclosed movement within the lesions.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was given one dose of oral cephalexin and levofloxacin prior to manipulation of the lesions. The three lesions were covered with occlusive lubricant and suction was applied with a snakebite kit suction syringe, with no result.
The patient was sent home with dicloxacillin and told to apply petroleum jelly to the lesions and cover with plastic wrap overnight. She returned the next morning. (See Figures 1 and 2.)
Figure 1. Physical finding on thigh.
Figure 2. Physical finding on chest.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A small white larva was visible protruding from her chest lesion. Suction was again applied to all three lesions, and motile white larvae, 1 cm long and 1/4 cm wide at largest, were extracted from all. (See Figures 2, 3, and 4.)
Figure 3. Botfly larvae after suctioning.
Figure 4. Botfly larvae.
Treatment and Followup
Discussion
In Central and South America, myiasis is caused by the botfly, Dermatobia hominis. The female fly lays her eggs on the underside of a female mosquito; with a blood meal, a newly hatched larva penetrates the skin of the human or animal host, where it feeds and matures for 4-10 weeks before exiting to pupate in soil.
The larvae pictured in this case are in the second stage of larval development. The cutaneous lesions are notable for the presence of a central breathing pore, and sometimes movement within the lesions can be felt by the host. Treatment is by extraction, best accomplished after the larva has been coaxed to the surface of the lesion by occlusion of the breathing pore. Asphyxiation of the larvae often facilitates extraction; sometimes surgical excision is required. Larvae should be extracted whole. Bacterial supra-infection is common. Antibiotics are often used to prevent or treat super-infection, as in this case.
Final Diagnosis
New World cutaneous myiasis (Botfly; Dermatobia hominis).
References
Hohenstein, E.J., and Buechner, S.A. (2004). Cutaneous myiasis due to Dermatobia hominis. Dermatology 208, 268-270.
PMID:15118386(PubMed abstract) Maier, H., and Honigsmann, H. (2004). Furuncular myiasis caused by Dermatobia hominis, the human botfly. J Am Acad Dermatol 50, S26-30.
PMID:14726861(PubMed abstract)
Hohenstein, E.J., and Buechner, S.A. (2004). Cutaneous myiasis due to Dermatobia hominis. Dermatology 208, 268-270.
PMID:15118386(PubMed abstract)
Maier, H., and Honigsmann, H. (2004). Furuncular myiasis caused by Dermatobia hominis, the human botfly. J Am Acad Dermatol 50, S26-30.
PMID:14726861(PubMed abstract)
