History of Present Illness
A male in his twenties was brought in by his family for two days of worsening mental status. He was seen several times at outside Emergency Departments for several weeks of progressive abdominal pain, nausea with emesis, frontal headache, myalgias, fever and facial rash. Prior evaluation included a lumbar puncture that was negative for pleocytosis, hypoglycorrhachia or elevated protein. Ten days prior to hospitalization, a HIV Antigen/Antibody test returned positive, and he was instructed to follow up with Infectious Diseases as an outpatient.
Past Medical History
None
Medications
None
Allergies
None
Epidemiological History
Patient was born in the East Coast US but lived in Mexico during his childhood. He was living in the United States for the past two years and had no recent travel. He is sexually active with men only and occasionally uses condoms. He does not use tobacco or injection drugs. He works at a poultry farm.
Physical Examination
He was hypothermic at 31.9 degrees Celsius. His blood pressure was 92/75 mm Hg. Heart rate was 98 beats per minute. He was tachypneic with a respiratory rate of 33 breaths per minute but was not hypoxic. Overall, he was toxic-appearing, diaphoretic, and in mild distress. The exam was notable for a diffusely tender abdomen and scattered hyperpigmented macules on his torso and lower extremities. His left shoulder had two violaceous red papules with central crusting and umbilication (see figure 1). There was a scabbed lesion on the right nasal tip and crusting along the left nasal ala (see figure 2). He was oriented to person and place but not to time. The rest of the exam was normal.
Figure 1. Fig 1A. Physical exam finding of left shoulder violaceous red papule. Fig 1B. Physical exam finding of left shoulder violaceous red papules with central crusting.
Fig 1A. Physical exam finding of left shoulder violaceous red papule. Fig 1B. Physical exam finding of left shoulder violaceous red papules with central crusting.
Figure 2. Fig 2. Physical exam finding of right nasal tip scab with left nasal ala crusting.
Fig 2. Physical exam finding of right nasal tip scab with left nasal ala crusting.
Studies
The lumbar puncture revealed an opening pressure of 7 mm Hg, 1 WBC, 7 RBCs, protein 34mg/dL (reference range 14-47mg/dL), glucose 45mg/dL (reference range 48-79mg/dL). Platelets were 86 x 10 9 /L (reference range 150-440 x10 9 /L). Sodium was 123mmol/L (reference range 135-145mmol/L), creatinine 1.86mg/dL (reference range 0.60-1.10mg/dL). Total bilirubin was 6.2mg/dL (reference range 0.3-1.2mg/dL), aspartate aminotransferase 256 U/L (reference range <=34U/L), alanine transaminase 93 U/L (reference range 10-49U/L), and alkaline phosphatase 223 U/L (reference range 46-116). Lactate dehydrogenase was 1,887 U/L (reference range 120-246 U/L). The remainder of other routine laboratory tests were normal. Cryptococcal antigen testing was negative. CD4 count was <10 cells/µL (reference range 510-2,320 cells/µL), with HIV RNA 776,495 copies/mL. Nasopharyngeal swab for Influenza, RSV, and SARS-CoV-2 PCR was negative. A contrasted computed tomography (CT) of the head had no acute abnormality. Contrasted CT of the abdomen and pelvis revealed mild splenomegaly, enlarged mesenteric and retroperitoneal lymph nodes and normal appearing gastrointestinal tract. Contrasted CT of the chest demonstrated diffuse bilateral ground glass and nodular opacities (see figure 3).
Figure 3. Fig 3. Contrasted computed tomography of the chest. Axial view demonstrating diffuse bilateral ground glass and nodular opacities.
Fig 3. Contrasted computed tomography of the chest. Axial view demonstrating diffuse bilateral ground glass and nodular opacities.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
While in the Emergency Department, he developed worsening metabolic acidosis and was subsequently intubated for increased work of breathing and airway protection. He required vasopressor support for hypotension and was placed on continuous renal replacement therapy. Serial labs demonstrated increased transaminases, electrolyte derangements, worsened thrombocytopenia, and anemia. He underwent EGD for acute upper GI bleed and left gastric artery embolization for severe gastritis.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Serum Aspergillus galactomannan antigen returned positive at 4.26 (reference <0.5), however bronchial Aspergillus galactomannan was normal. Histoplasma antigen was elevated in the urine at > 25 ng/ml. Histoplasma capsulatum eventually grew from bone marrow, bronchial lavage, skin punch and gastric biopsies (see figure 4). Cryptococcus neoformans grew from bone marrow and blood culture (see figures 5 and 6). Cryptococcal antigen tests on CSF and serum were repeated and were negative. Patient was also found to have a positive Herpes simplex virus (HSV) PCR skin swab, biopsy proven Cytomegalovirus (CMV) colitis, as well as Shigella diarrheal illness.
Figure 4. Fig 4. Tape prep with lactophenol cotton blue stain at 40x magnification on bronchial lavage fungal culture showing hyphae with tuberculate, thick-walled macroconidia consistent with Histoplasma capsulatum.
Fig 4. Tape prep with lactophenol cotton blue stain at 40x magnification on bronchial lavage fungal culture showing hyphae with tuberculate, thick-walled macroconidia consistent with Histoplasma capsulatum.
Figure 5. Fig 5. Gram stain at 100x magnification from bone marrow biopsy growth in bottle demonstrating yeast.
Fig 5. Gram stain at 100x magnification from bone marrow biopsy growth in bottle demonstrating yeast.
Figure 6. Fig 6. GMS stain at 40x magnification on bone marrow biopsy demonstrating small budding yeast, unable to distinguish between Cryptococcus and Histoplasma.
Fig 6. GMS stain at 40x magnification on bone marrow biopsy demonstrating small budding yeast, unable to distinguish between Cryptococcus and Histoplasma.
Treatment and Followup
The patient was started on liposomal amphotericin B for empiric antifungal coverage. Flucytosine was added once Cryptococcus was identified in bone marrow and blood, as there was also concern for central nervous system involvement. Treatment was complicated by ongoing nausea, emesis and poor oral intake from his severe gastritis. He was transitioned from 5-flucytosine (administered via nasogastric tube) to IV fluconazole once he was no longer able to take oral medications. After the induction phase, he was started on itraconazole maintenance therapy but there was difficulty obtaining therapeutic levels with multiple drug adjustments. He completed twelve days of acyclovir for cutaneous HSV infection, and several weeks of ganciclovir for CMV colitis. Eventually he was switched to posaconazole with adequate levels upon discharge. At outpatient follow up, the patient was doing well. He was switched back to itraconazole and was started on antiretroviral therapy.
Discussion
This case demonstrates the pervasiveness of opportunistic infections that co-exist within immunocompromised patients. While Cryptococcus and Histoplasma are both found within the environment, they rarely co-infect individuals. In this case, induction with amphotericin and 5-flucytosine was given for nearly four weeks, given concern for CNS involvement of Cryptococcus despite negative CSF cultures. Itraconazole was selected over fluconazole for its improved efficacy in Histoplasmosis (1). This case was also particularly puzzling as the patient had several negative serum and cerebrospinal fluid cryptococcal antigen (CrAg) tests. Cryptococcal antigen test targets glucuronoxylomannan (GXM), which is the main polysaccharide component of the cryptococcal capsule (2). Often, the CrAg acts as a surrogate biomarker for Cryptococcus, as it has >95% sensitivity and specificity in CSF, serum and blood (2-3). However, false negative CrAg tests can be encountered in several situations: low fungal load, hypocapsular or acapsular strains of Cryptococcus, postzone reaction secondary to high antigen titers, or immune complex deposition preventing release of glucuronoxylomannan (4). In our patient, Cryptococcus was found in both bone marrow and blood, so we suspected a high fungal load. Serial dilution of our sample was performed, and a negative CrAg was again obtained, thus ruling out the possibility of a postzone reaction. India ink staining was not available and thus could not be used to quickly identify the presence of a capsule. We therefore proceeded with mixing studies to evaluate for the presence of an inhibitor. A 0.5 McFarland broth was created of the patient’s Cryptococcus strain and a third-party Cryptococcus strain. Both were inoculated into third-party serum (negative for Cryptococcus) as well as our patient’s serum. These mixing studies were subjected to our standard Cryptococcal antigen lateral flow immunoassay. Results were compared to evaluate for the presence of an inhibitor. In this study, a two-fold or more change in antigen-titer would indicate a significant change in antigen load that would be concerning for an inhibitor. Our patient’s Cryptococcus strain mixed with a third-party serum yielded a positive antigen-titer, thus confirming the presence of a GXM polysaccharide capsule. While there were slight differences in antigen titers between third-party serum and our patient’s serum spiked by third-party or our patient’s Cryptococcus, nothing was greater than one titer difference in either direction, thus eliminating the possibility of a serum inhibitor. But why was our patient’s original CrAg test negative? Above mixing studies did not co-incubate Histoplasma with the patient’s Cryptococcus and thus did not account for this co-infection. We hypothesize that in vivo incubation with both Histoplasma and Cryptococcus may have created an immune complex deposition preventing release of glucuronoxylomannan thus giving a false negative lateral flow assay. Interaction between Histoplasmosis and the capsule of Cryptococcus has been previously documented. Capsular strains of Cryptococcus are composed of glucuronoxylomannan (GXM) which functions in inhibition of phagocytosis and dysregulation of immune responses, as well as interference in antigen presentation. Prior mice studies have demonstrated that Histoplasma can acquire and incorporate GXM from Cryptococcus into the yeast cell surface. This functions to reduce intracellular killing and phagocytosis of the Histoplasma by macrophages, which in turn, increases virulence of this yeast (5). Thus, synchronous infection increases virulence and morbidity in mice models and may also explain the severity of disease in co-infected humans. As demonstrated in this case, in instances where disseminated Histoplasmosis is found, one may not be able to rely on serum or CSF CrAg testing to make the diagnosis of Cryptococcus.
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated Cryptococcus neoformans and Histoplasma capsulatum
References
Wheat, L. Joseph, et al. "Antigen clearance during treatment of disseminated histoplasmosis with itraconazole versus fluconazole in patients with AIDS." Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy 46.1 (2002): 248-250.
PMID:11751146(PubMed abstract) Hansen, Jessica, et al. "Large-scale evaluation of the immuno-mycologics lateral flow and enzyme-linked immunoassays for detection of cryptococcal antigen in serum and cerebrospinal fluid." Clinical and Vaccine Immunology 20.1 (2013): 52-55.
PMID:23114703(PubMed abstract) Binnicker, M. J., et al. "Comparison of four assays for the detection of cryptococcal antigen." Clinical and Vaccine Immunology 19.12 (2012): 1988-1990.
PMID:23081814(PubMed abstract) Borges, Moara Alves Santa Bárbara, et al. "False-negative result of serum cryptococcal antigen lateral flow assay in an HIV-infected patient with culture-proven cryptococcaemia." Medical mycology case reports 26 (2019): 64-66.
PMID:31737475(PubMed abstract) Cordero, Radames JB, et al. "Enhanced virulence of Histoplasma capsulatum through transfer and surface incorporation of glycans from Cryptococcus neoformans during co-infection." Scientific reports 6.1 (2016): 1-16.
PMID:26908077(PubMed abstract)
Wheat, L. Joseph, et al. "Antigen clearance during treatment of disseminated histoplasmosis with itraconazole versus fluconazole in patients with AIDS." Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy 46.1 (2002): 248-250.
PMID:11751146(PubMed abstract)
Hansen, Jessica, et al. "Large-scale evaluation of the immuno-mycologics lateral flow and enzyme-linked immunoassays for detection of cryptococcal antigen in serum and cerebrospinal fluid." Clinical and Vaccine Immunology 20.1 (2013): 52-55.
PMID:23114703(PubMed abstract)
Binnicker, M. J., et al. "Comparison of four assays for the detection of cryptococcal antigen." Clinical and Vaccine Immunology 19.12 (2012): 1988-1990.
PMID:23081814(PubMed abstract)
Borges, Moara Alves Santa Bárbara, et al. "False-negative result of serum cryptococcal antigen lateral flow assay in an HIV-infected patient with culture-proven cryptococcaemia." Medical mycology case reports 26 (2019): 64-66.
PMID:31737475(PubMed abstract)
Cordero, Radames JB, et al. "Enhanced virulence of Histoplasma capsulatum through transfer and surface incorporation of glycans from Cryptococcus neoformans during co-infection." Scientific reports 6.1 (2016): 1-16.
PMID:26908077(PubMed abstract)
