History of Present Illness
2014 September-October Featured Case: A man in his forties with recent headache, cough, chills and diaphoresis, followed by a rash, was seen in a medical walk-in clinic.
The patient was well until 5 days before presentation when, in mid-spring (The time of year can be an important clue, since many infections show seasonal variation. For example, respiratory viruses - especially influenza - are more common during winter and early spring, and arthropod-borne infections such as Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever are more common in summer and early fall. Notably, these patterns are changing with global climate change.), headache associated with chills, diaphoresis (Chills, or the subjective sense of being cold in the absence of change in external temperature, is a sign that the body’s temperature regulation system is attempting to generate a fever, an adaptive response that aids in combating an infection. In constrast, diaphoresis, or sweating, results when that drive is removed and the body attempts to return to normal temperature. This pattern strongly suggests infection as opposed to other possible causes of the patient’s symptoms.) and sensitivity to sound (Hyperacusis, an increased sensitivity to sound, can be seen in a number of neurological conditions (including viral infections involving the inner ear) and is often accompanied by headache.) occurred. He took ibuprofen (a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent with both pain-relieving (analgesic) and fever-suppressing (anti-pyretic) effects. Patients will often take these for pain, causing their fever to be masked and potentially obscuring the diagnosis of infection.) for his symptoms, with some improvement. Two days later, a non-productive cough (A cough without production of thick, yellow-to-green sputum is often seen in viral infection or infection with predominantly intracellular bacteria (“atypical bacteria”).) and a mildly itchy throat developed. The next day, his headache improved, and his eyes became watery and red (Findings commonly seen in conjunctivitis. Watery inflammation, without thick discharge, suggests viral or allergic etiologies rather than bacterial involvement.). The following day, he flew to New England from his home in the Midwest. On the morning of the 5th day after the onset of symptoms (Temporal patterns of symptoms are important clues, often reflecting the underlying pathophysiology. Here, for example, the pattern suggests an initial local respiratory infection followed by systemic dissemination several days later. Different pathogens may have characteristic timing of symptom progression.]), he awakened with a rash on his face (Where a rash appears first is often a useful clue. The rash of measles typically begins on the face and spreads down, whereas the rash of Rocky Mountain Fever usually begins peripherally on the wrists and elbows, then spreads to more central locations.) and upper torso, without pruritus or pain (Pruritus (itchiness) suggests allergic causes. Painful rashes suggest tissue destruction or nerve involvement, such as seen with herpes rashes. Many viral rashes (exantha) are neither.); his other symptoms had improved.
He came to a medical walk-in clinic for evaluation. He reported dark-colored urine (Dark urine usually suggests dehydration but if the patient is well-hydrated it may indicate bilirubin in the urine, either from hepatitis or hemolysis (destruction of red blood cells).) despite drinking 'lots of water'. The remainder of a review of systems was negative.
Past Medical History
He had a history of asthma and seasonal allergies (People with seasonal allergies may develop watery eyes, rashes and, if there is sinus involvement, headaches. Chills and diaphoresis, as seen in this case, would be unusual with allergies alone.].).
Medications
He had taken medications for his acute symptoms, including ibuprofen, over-the-counter cold medications, antacids, and a cough suppressant. He reported having received all recommended childhood vaccinations (Vaccination history is critical in illnesses that involve rashes. Increasing numbers of parents are declining vaccination for their children, leading to outbreaks of vaccine-preventable infections. That said, no vaccine is 100% effective, and some cases may occur in vaccinated individuals.).
Allergies
He had no allergies to medications.
Family History
He drank 3 to 4 alcoholic beverages on weekend days, and had never smoked or used illicit drugs.
Social History
He lived with his wife (with whom he was monogamous (Sexual history is also important in illnesses presenting with rash, but often not obtained. Acute HIV infection, secondary syphilis, and disseminated gonococcal infection may all present with a rash.)), his children (Contact with small children, especially in school or daycare, is important to document as children are the principle reservoir for many infections, including parvovirus and influenza.) and a dog. His job required travel.
Epidemiological History
He lived in an upper Midwestern state (Many infections are sharply limited by geography, greatly influencing the “prior odds” of a particular infection. For example, the upper Midwest and New England show a strong cluster of high prevalence pathogens transmitted by Ixodes ticks, including Lyme disease, Babesiosis, and Anaplasmosis. http://www.cdc.gov/lyme/resources/Tickbornediseases.pdf). He owned a dog, which occasionally had ticks (Several important tick-borne illnesses present with malaise and rash. These are more common in warmer months but ticks may over-winter in warm garages, barns, etc.). He had traveled in the preceding weeks through multiple airports (Travel even with exposure as brief as in airports can be an important risk. The confined space of an airplane, for example, can promote the spread of airborne pathogens such as measles.) throughout the United States for his job, including one day before his presentation, when he traveled by airplane to New England. He had also traveled internationally in the past, but not within the previous 3 months.
Physical Examination
The temperature was 98.6°F (37.0°C) and later rose to 100.1°F (37.8°C); the blood pressure was 137/86 mm Hg, pulse 76 beats per minute, respirations 18 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 96% while breathing room air. There was a diffuse erythematous, blanching (A blanching rash results from dilation of small vessels in the skin in the setting of inflammation. This is more typical of ordinary viral exantha. In contrast, petechial or purpuric rashes result from microscopic bleeding into the skin and these do not blanch with palpation. This is an important physical finding since some life-threatening infections like meningococcemia present most often with non-blanching rashes.) maculopapular rash on face (See above regarding anatomical patterns of rash.) and, less so, on the trunk and arms (Figures 1 and 2). The palms and legs were not involved. The conjunctiva (See above regarding conjunctivitis.) were slightly erythematous diffusely (right eye greater than left). An erythematous macule (approximately 5mm in diameter) was seen on the palate (Oral lesions may provide strong clues to the diagnosis since some viruses such as Herpes Simplex and Coxsackie produce characteristic oral lesions. In this case, if the lesion had a gray-white center, it could represent a Koplik spot and would be nearly diagnostic of measles.). There was mild diffuse lymphadenopathy (Diffuse lymphadenopathy is characteristic of viral infections, in contrast with the more regional lymphadenopathy seen in focal bacterial infections. In some cases, for example the posterior cervical predominance seen in mononucleosis, the distribution may provide additional clues.). The abdomen was obese and soft, with normal bowel sounds and without tenderness. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Rash on torso.
Figure 2. Rash on face and upper torso.
Studies
The white blood cell count (Leukopenia, or low white blood cell count, in the setting of infection is an important finding with a limited differential. Most infections will cause at least some elevation of at least some white blood cell types. Falling white blood cell counts happens with direct infection and destruction of the cells (as in Anaplasmosis), rapid consumption (as in severe sepsis), failure of white cell production (with bone marrow malignancy or cytotoxic chemotherapy), or indirect suppression via lack of help from infected T-cells and macrophages (as in measles).) was 3300 per cubic millimeter (reference range 4500-11,000), with neutrophils 50.5%, band forms (Bands are newly derived neutrophils. Isolated changes in absolute numbers of white blood cells are often diagnostically unhelpful, since they can rapidly shift in and out of blood circulation for a variety of reasons. Elevated numbers of band forms, however, are usually significant, since it indicates an attempt by the immune system to ramp up neutrophil production.) 23.9%, lymphocytes 10.6% (This is a relative lymphopenia, a clue that this may be a pathogen that, like measles, infects and destroys lymphocytes.), atypical lymphocytes (Something of a misnomer, since the cells are not really “atypical”, just activated. High levels of atypicals lymphocytes are seen in some infections like mononucleosis. http://www.meded.uci.edu/macc/hematology-photos-with-descriptions/images/image077-Atypical-Lymphocyte-PB.jpg) 1.8%, monocytes 6.2%, eosinophils (Eosinophilia can be seen in allergy and some parasitic infections, neither of which is likely in this case. In contrast, normal eosinophil levels as seen here argue against serious bacterial infection, where there is usually marked eosinopenia.) 3.5%, basophils 0.9% and other cells (described as lymphoid cells with basophilic cytoplasm and eccentric nuclei, suspicious for plasma cells) 2.7%. Burr cells (Echinocytes. Can be seen in a number of types of altered blood chemistry but at least as often are simply sample preparation artifacts as a result of changes in osmotic strength.) were seen on review of the peripheral smear. Urinalysis revealed amber cloudy urine, with 1+ occult blood, 2+ albumin, 1+ urobilinogen (Possibly contributing to the dark-colored urine described in this case.]) by dipstick and 0 to 2 white and red cells, 1+ bacteria and mucin per high-power field. The blood level of alkaline phosphatase was 360 U/L (reference range 45-115), alanine aminotransferase (Low-level elevation of serum liver enzymes with a predominance of transaminase (ALT and AST) elevation indicates hepatocellular injury. This is a very non-specific finding, but would be consistent with viral infection where there is some liver involvement, such as cytomegalovirus or measles.) 218 U/L (reference range 10-55) and aspartate aminotransferase 121 U/L (reference range 10-40). The hematocrit, hemoglobin, platelet count and blood levels of electrolytes, calcium, glucose, total protein, albumin, globulin, total bilirubin and tests of renal function were normal.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A nasal specimen was positive for measles virus by direct immunofluorescent antibody testing (Figures 3 and 4). On the second day, testing for Measles virus IgG antibodies was positive (At the time of the onset of the rash, the patient has usually been infected for more than a week, counting the period of incubation and subsequent non-specific systemic symptoms. Testing for IgG antibodies to measles may or may not be positive at this time point. When this test is negative, the diagnosis can be confirmed by documenting the appearance of specific antibodies in a “convalescent” serum sample obtained 2-4 weeks later. In this case, the diagnosis is made already by immunofluorescence. Increasingly, direct nucleic acid testing for viral RNA can provide a more sensitive screen.). The next day, testing for Measles virus IgM antibodies was positive, as reported by an outside laboratory.
Rapid test for influenza A and B and streptococcal pharyngitis were negative. Testing for hepatitis A was consistent with prior exposure or vaccination; testing for hepatitis B and C viruses was negative; testing for typhus IgG antibodies was 1:128 and was thought to be consistent with past disease. Testing for heterophile antibodies, antibodies to parvovirus B19, anti-treponemal antibodies, spotted fever IgM and IgG antibodies, rubella IgM and IgG antibodies, cytomegalovirus nucleic acids, Epstein Barr virus nucleic acids, and HIV nucleic acids and antibodies (HIV1 and HIV2) were negative. A sputum culture grew Haemophilus influenzae (H. influenzae would under ordinary circumstances be an unusual pathogen to recover from the sputum of an immunocompetent, non-smoking-adult with presumably normal lungs. Outside of the pediatric setting, this organism causes an infection of lungs with impaired defenses, since the organism lacks the virulence factors to commonly cause invasive disease in a healthy adult lung. However, if the lung’s defenses are impaired for any reason, it can get a foothold. Here, there is both direct injury through viral replication in respiratory epithelia and immune suppression of infected cells of the reticuloendothelial system. Although measles is usually a relatively mild, self-limited disease, secondary bacterial pneumonia is one of the most common serious complications.) and a sputum specimen was negative for respiratory viral antigens.
Abdominal ultrasonography demonstrated mild splenomegaly (Measles virus initially replicates mostly at respiratory mucosa where it is introduced upon infection, then spreads to the phagocyte and macrophage (reticuloendothelial) system, of which the spleen is by far the largest organ.), and was otherwise normal.
Figure 3. Direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) testing of nasal specimen for measles virus (green = positive reaction).
Figure 4. DFA of nasal specimen for measles virus (1000x magnification).
Treatment and Followup
Upon initial evaluation, the patient was immediately placed on airborne (respiratory) precautions (Different respiratory pathogens spread differently depending in part on the size of the exhaled water droplets to which the virions are associated. Large droplet pathogens such as rhinovirus, which causes colds, are spread mostly by direct contact with infected secretions. Infected patients need only contact precautions. Medium-sized droplet pathogens, such as influenza, can be spread a few feet through the air through coughing or sneezing, and these patients require droplet precautions. Small droplet pathogens like measles can float in air for significant distances and these patients need full respiratory isolation.) and, pending the results of diagnostic tests, placed in a negative pressure room upon transfer to the emergency department and when admitted to the hospital. The hospital infection control epidemiologist and local and state public health authorities were contacted regarding the suspicion of a diagnosis of measles, and contact exposure investigation was performed. Epidemiologic investigation eventually linked this patient to a person traveling from another country within the previous weeks (and before his travel to New England), who was at the same airport gate, but not on the same plane, and was diagnosed with measles. The measles genotype of both patients was the same (genotype D8).
Ibuprofen (Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or NSAIDs, can be useful as analgesics, but are often given unnecessarily as antipyretics under the mistaken belief that fever is pathological. Rather, fever is usually an adaptive response and blocking it may results in a modest delay in clearance of a viral infection.) was administered as needed for headache. The patient was discharged on the sixth hospital day.
Discussion
Measles is caused by a single-stranded enveloped RNA virus, a member of the Morbillivirus genus in the Paramyxoviridae family. The virus is highly contagious through respiratory secretions via coughing and sneezing. The period of contagiousness is up to five days before the appearance of rash and within four-to-five days afterwards. Classic measles has four clinical stages. First, the incubation period starts after measles enters the respiratory mucosa or conjunctivae, replicates, and spreads to reticuloendothelial sites. This period lasts 8-10 days. Secondly, the prodrome phase is characterized by fever and malaise, followed by cough, coryza, and conjunctivitis. This period usually lasts 2-3 days. Patients may manifest Koplik’s spots (white spots on the buccal mucosa), which are pathognomonic. The third stage is the exanthema, which is a blanching maculopapular rash starting on the face and spreading inferiorly to the trunk and extremities. Palms and soles are usually spared. Clinical improvement starts within 48 hours of the appearance of the rash. Complications include pneumonia, encephalitis, gingivostomatitis, gastroenteritis, hepatitis, and myocarditis. The fourth phase, recovery, is marked usually by lifelong immunity.
Measles remains a global public health problem with 120,000 deaths caused by the disease in 2012 [WHO, 2014]. Endemic measles in the United States was eliminated in 2000 [Katz et al, 2004]. However, during 2001-2008, there were 557 confirmed cases of measles and 38 outbreaks [Fiebelkorn et al, 2010]. Of these cases, 42% were directly imported from 44 countries, and the rest were US-acquired cases with either a link to an imported case or with unclear source (i.e. no established link to imported case or endemic transmission). Sixty-five percent of cases during this period were in unvaccinated patients, and vaccination status was unknown in 18% of cases. Two deaths were reported. The acute clinical syndrome may be very severe in adults without prior immunity.
Importation of measles cases from endemic areas of the world continues to occur, with a record number of measles cases reported in the US this year from January 1 to May 23, 2014. The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) noted 228 confirmed cases during that period with fifteen outbreaks accounting for 79% of the cases [Gastañaduy et al, 2014]. Unvaccinated (69%) and those with unknown vaccination status (20%) again accounted for the majority of cases. Forty-five direct importations from abroad have been reported, and 49% of these importations were travelers returning from the Philippines, where a large outbreak has been occurring since October 2013.
Because of the limited experience that newer generations of US health care providers have had with measles, cases have been initially misdiagnosed as Kawasaki disease, dengue, and scarlet fever. There has also been a report of measles outbreak among persons with prior evidence of immunity [Rosen et al, 2014]. In cases of previously vaccinated patients who develop incomplete immunity, a “vaccine-modified measles” can occur, which is a milder form with a shorter prodromal period. The exanthem often does not progress to confluence, and Koplik’s spots may not appear [Cherry 1993; Choe et al, 2012]. These trends underscore the importance of maintaining high population immunity and vigilance for measles. Two doses of MMR vaccine is 95% effective in preventing measles [Marin et al, 2006].
Suspicion for measles requires immediate respiratory isolation of the patient, including potential hospitalization, as well as notification of relevant public health authorities. While these precautions are necessary for minimizing the risk of an outbreak, they create a considerable amount of work for clinical staff and inconvenience for the patient. Nevertheless, given the highly contagious nature of measles and the potential for significant morbidity and mortality in individuals without adequate immunization, clinicians should be vigilant in considering the diagnosis of measles in at-risk patients who present with suggestive signs and symptoms and should isolate such patients while diagnostic testing is undertaken.
Of the other pathogens on the differential, the rash of secondary syphilis is highly varied, but classically is a macular lesion on the palms and/or soles [Cohen et al, 2013]. Scarlet fever produces a diffuse erythematous rash with “sandpaper” quality to the skin due to small 1-2mm papular elevations. Classically, there is circumoral pallor [Cherry 1993]. Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), caused by Rickettsia rickettsii, leads to a macular blanching erythematous rash that becomes petechial over time, beginning on the ankles and wrists, spreading to the trunk [Woods 2013]. The rash of rubella is similar in distribution to measles, but the spread is more rapid, and the color is less intense. Suboccipital and postauricular lymphadenopathy are particularly common in adults with rubella, and can help with the diagnosis [Cherry 1993]. Other diagnoses to consider include acute HIV (which can present with a maculopapular rash, often involving the upper thorax, collar, and face, and sometimes the scalp and extremities) and parvovirus infection, which is usually seen in school-aged children and usually causes an erythematous malar rash over the cheeks (“slapped cheek”), followed by lacelike rash on trunk and extremities.
Final Diagnosis
Acute measles infection.
References
Cherry JD. (1993) Contemporary infectious exanthems. Clin Infect Dis 1993; 16:199-207.
PMID:8443297(PubMed abstract) Choe YK, Hu JK, Song KM, Cho H, Yoon HS, Kim ST, Lee HJ, Kim K, Bae GR, Lee JK. (2012) Evaluation of an expanded case definition for vaccine-modified measles in a school outbreak in South Korea in 2010. Jpn J Infect Dis 2012; 65:371-375.
PMID:22996208(PubMed abstract) Cohen SE, Klausner JD, Engelman J, Philip S. (2013) Syphilis in the modern era. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2013; 27(4):705-722.
PMID:24275265(PubMed abstract) Fiebelkorn AP, Redd SB, Gallagher K, Rota PA, Rota J, Bellini W, Seward J. (2010) Measles in the United States during the postelimination era. J Infect Dis. 2010 Nov 15;202(10):1520-8.
PMID:20929352(PubMed abstract) Gastañaduy PA, Redd SB, Fiebelkorn AP, Rota JS, Rota PA, Bellini WJ, Seward JF, Wallace GS; Division of Viral Disease, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC. (2014) Measles - United States, January 1-May 23, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014 Jun 6;63(22):496-9.
PMID:24898167(PubMed abstract) Hay CM, Shepard JA, Hyle EP, Duncan LM. (2014) Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 23-2014. A 41-year-old man with fevers, rash, pancytopenia, and abnormal liver function. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jul 24;371(4):358-66. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcpc1404140.
PMID:25054720(PubMed abstract) Katz SL, Hinman AR. (2004) Summary and conclusions: measles elimination meeting, 16-17 March 2000. J Infect Dis 2004; 189:S43-47.
PMID:15106088(PubMed abstract) Marin M, Nguyen HQ, Langidrik JR, Edwards R, Briand K, Papania MJ, Seward JF, LeBaron CW. (2006) Measles transmission and vaccine effectiveness during a large outbreak on a densely populated island: implications for vaccination policy. Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Feb 1;42(3):315-9.
PMID:16392073(PubMed abstract) Rosen JB, Rota JS, Hickman CJ, Sowers SB, Mercader S, Rota PA, Bellini WJ, Huang AJ, Doll MK, Zucker JR, Zimmerman CM. (2014) Outbreak of measles among persons with prior evidence of immunity, New York City, 2011. Clin Infect Dis. 2014 May;58(9):1205-10..
PMID:24585562(PubMed abstract) Woods, CR. (2013) Rocky mountain spotted fever in children. Pediatr Clin N Am 2013; 60:455-470.
PMID:23481111(PubMed abstract) World Health Organization (WHO). Measles fact sheet. Geneva: World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs286/en/. Accessed 9 June 2014.
Cherry JD. (1993) Contemporary infectious exanthems. Clin Infect Dis 1993; 16:199-207.
PMID:8443297(PubMed abstract)
Choe YK, Hu JK, Song KM, Cho H, Yoon HS, Kim ST, Lee HJ, Kim K, Bae GR, Lee JK. (2012) Evaluation of an expanded case definition for vaccine-modified measles in a school outbreak in South Korea in 2010. Jpn J Infect Dis 2012; 65:371-375.
PMID:22996208(PubMed abstract)
Cohen SE, Klausner JD, Engelman J, Philip S. (2013) Syphilis in the modern era. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2013; 27(4):705-722.
PMID:24275265(PubMed abstract)
Fiebelkorn AP, Redd SB, Gallagher K, Rota PA, Rota J, Bellini W, Seward J. (2010) Measles in the United States during the postelimination era. J Infect Dis. 2010 Nov 15;202(10):1520-8.
PMID:20929352(PubMed abstract)
Gastañaduy PA, Redd SB, Fiebelkorn AP, Rota JS, Rota PA, Bellini WJ, Seward JF, Wallace GS; Division of Viral Disease, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC. (2014) Measles - United States, January 1-May 23, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014 Jun 6;63(22):496-9.
PMID:24898167(PubMed abstract)
Hay CM, Shepard JA, Hyle EP, Duncan LM. (2014) Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 23-2014. A 41-year-old man with fevers, rash, pancytopenia, and abnormal liver function. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jul 24;371(4):358-66. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcpc1404140.
PMID:25054720(PubMed abstract)
Katz SL, Hinman AR. (2004) Summary and conclusions: measles elimination meeting, 16-17 March 2000. J Infect Dis 2004; 189:S43-47.
PMID:15106088(PubMed abstract)
Marin M, Nguyen HQ, Langidrik JR, Edwards R, Briand K, Papania MJ, Seward JF, LeBaron CW. (2006) Measles transmission and vaccine effectiveness during a large outbreak on a densely populated island: implications for vaccination policy. Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Feb 1;42(3):315-9.
PMID:16392073(PubMed abstract)
Rosen JB, Rota JS, Hickman CJ, Sowers SB, Mercader S, Rota PA, Bellini WJ, Huang AJ, Doll MK, Zucker JR, Zimmerman CM. (2014) Outbreak of measles among persons with prior evidence of immunity, New York City, 2011. Clin Infect Dis. 2014 May;58(9):1205-10..
PMID:24585562(PubMed abstract)
Woods, CR. (2013) Rocky mountain spotted fever in children. Pediatr Clin N Am 2013; 60:455-470.
PMID:23481111(PubMed abstract)
World Health Organization (WHO). Measles fact sheet. Geneva: World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs286/en/. Accessed 9 June 2014.
