History of Present Illness
2007 June Featured Case Summary: A college student with fever and headache, approximately six months after a trip to East Africa.
A man in his twenties (Age, gender and race provide important clues to the diagnosis.) presented in the late fall (Certain infections are very common during a particular season of the year.) with fever, myalgias, and headache for one week. Earlier in the year, he had spent the four months of his spring semester in East Africa, returning in June (Timeline is very important in relation to the travel history as some infections have early and late stages of symptomatology. Infections may also reactivate or recur. Concept: In reactivation, a pathogen that has been latent - that is, present but not growing or causing symptoms - begins to replicate and become clinically apparent. Reactivation is sometimes triggered by physiologic stress on the host. In contrast, the term recurrence is used to indicate that a person who had cleared an infection has become re-infected.). He took mefloquine weekly while in Africa, but had stopped the medication immediately upon his return (The administration of drugs aimed at preventing malaria infection, or suppressive chemoprophylaxis, should be continued until 4 weeks after leaving endemic areas in order to be effective against hypnozoites, dormant liver stages of non-falciparum plasmodia.). Approximately four weeks later, he developed temperatures to 103°F (39.4°C), myalgias and headache. Malaria, caused by Plasmodium falciparum, was diagnosed and atovaquone-proguanil and quinine (Note that these medications only act on the blood stage of the parasitic life cycle.) were administered, with improvement.
Approximately four months later, temperatures to 101.7°F (38.7°C), myalgias and headache developed again. The symptoms were similar to those several months before (Recurrence of similar symptoms may suggest the presence of a pathogen that has remained present but dormant and then reactivated.), and followed a temporal pattern, with the most intense symptom occurring every 48 hours (Fever pattern can be an important clue in diagnosis. The replication of plasmodia within red cells is often synchronized, producing a burst of red cell lysis and fever every two or three days. Although seen less often now, this is the classic fever pattern of malaria. In older literature, fever that occurs every 48 hours is referred to as tertian; that occurring every 72 hours is called quartan.). He presented the following week for evaluation.
Past Medical History
The patient had been in good health until his trip to Africa (Prior health and detailed travel itinerary are very important since the differential diagnosis may be different based on where the disease was acquired.). While in Kenya, during his second month in Africa, he was hospitalized for a few days because of temperatures to 103°F (39.4°C), of unknown origin; testing at that time was negative for malaria.
Epidemiological History
He had been born in the Midwestern United States and attended a university in the Northeast. He had studied in several locations throughout East Africa, including prolonged periods in Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda. While there, he had received several bites from mosquitoes, particularly while sleeping uncovered in Northern Uganda. Since returning to the U.S., he had gone camping in Wisconsin and on Cape Cod (Camping in these areas would raise the issue of tick-borne infections such as Lyme disease. Frequently the tick bites are not noticed.), but did not notice any tick bites.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared fatigued and was sensitive to light, preferring a darkened room. The blood pressure (Normal range is 100-120 mm Hg systolic and 60-80 mm Hg diastolic.) was 120/58 mm Hg, pulse (Normal range is 60-100 beats per minute) 76 beats per minute, and the temperature (Normal range is 97-99 degrees fahrenheit.) 97.8°F (36.6°C). The remainder of the examination was normal (Normal examinations can be seen in malaria on the days between fevers.) and there was no meningismus, pallor, hepatosplenomegaly, or notable skin rashes.
Studies
The white blood (This patient’s white blood cell differential reveals more neutrophils and band forms, and fewer lymphocytes, than normal, a finding referred to as a left shift.) cell count was 6,100 cells per cubic millimeter, with 63% neutrophils, 10% band forms, 16% lymphocytes, 8% monocytes, and 3% eosinophils; the hematocrit was 40%, platelet count 94,000 per cubic millimeter (Decreased platelets, known as thrombocytopenia, may be seen in malaria, as well as some other infections.), and serum transaminase levels were normal. The total bilirubin was 1.4 mg per deciliter and direct bilirubin 0.5 mg per deciliter (His indirect bilirubin is elevated, suggesting that red blood cells are breaking down or hemolysing, and releasing hemoglobin into the bloodstream. This is often observed in malaria since the parasites lyse red blood cells during their replication cycle.), with reference ranges of up to 1.0 and 0.4 mg/dl respectively. Stains of peripheral blood smears are shown in Figures 1 through 4.
Figure 1. Stain of whole blood specimen.
Figure 2. Thin smear of whole blood specimen.
Figure 3. Thin smear.
Figure 4. Thin smear.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Thin preparations of blood smears reveal intracellular forms with morphology most consistent with Plasmodium vivax (Figures 3 and 4). Parasitemia was estimated at 0.5%.
Treatment and Followup
Chloroquine was administered for three days with complete resolution of symptoms. The serum level of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) was normal, and the patient subsequently received primaquine (Primaquine is used to treat the liver forms of non-falciparum plasmodia. G6PD levels are checked before administration of the drug because people with G6PD deficiency may experience severe hemolysis if given primaquine.) for 14 days.
Discussion
Malaria is a serious concern for patients who travel to and from endemic regions. Malaria is a serious concern for patients who travel to and from endemic regions. Unfortunately, recommended chemoprophylaxis with blood schizontidicides has been shown to fail, particularly with Plasmodium vivax and P. ovale, which can form dormant hepatic hypnozoites. When this patient presented four weeks after returning from Africa, malaria was rapidly diagnosed at another facility, attributed to Plasmodium falciparum, and treatment was administered. Based on that species diagnosis, no therapy targeting hepatic hypnozoites was administered. Four months later, the patient represented with malaria.
Differentiation between Plasmodium vivax and P. ovale can be difficult on morphology alone. The round gametocyte seen in this case (Figure 5) is most consistent with P. vivax. The trophozoite has an amoeboid form (Figure 6). Between 50-70% of malaria cases in United States are caused by P. falciparum, 20-40% by P. vivax; P. ovale and P. malariae account for lesser percentages. (See references.) P. vivax has a substantial presence in Ethiopia (up to 30% in literature, compared with 60% malarial cases caused by P. falciparum) and other Horn of Africa countries, where the presence of the duffy blood group is higher than that found in sub-Saharan Africa. However, P. vivax has been reported in cases originating in Kenya, and in patients with negative duffy blood group typing.
Final Diagnosis
Malaria, most consistent with Plasmodium vivax infection.
References
Cherenet, T., Sani, R.A., Speybroeck, N., Panandam, J.M., Nadzr, S., and Van den Bossche, P. (2006). A comparative longitudinal study of bovine trypanosomiasis in tsetse-free and tsetse-infested zones of the Amhara Region, northwest Ethiopia. Vet Parasitol 140, 251-258.
PMID:16675127(PubMed abstract) Kassa, D., Petros, B., Mesele, T., Hailu, E., and Wolday, D. (2006). Characterization of peripheral blood lymphocyte subsets in patients with acute Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax malaria infections at Wonji Sugar Estate, Ethiopia. Clin Vaccine Immunol 13, 376-379.
PMID:16522780(PubMed abstract) Ryan, J.R., Stoute, J.A., Amon, J., Dunton, R.F., Mtalib, R., Koros, J., Owour, B., Luckhart, S., Wirtz, R.A., Barnwell, J.W., et al. (2006). Evidence for transmission of Plasmodium vivax among a duffy antigen negative population in Western Kenya. Am J Trop Med Hyg 75, 575-581.
PMID:17038676(PubMed abstract) Schunk, M., Kumma, W.P., Miranda, I.B., Osman, M.E., Roewer, S., Alano, A., Loscher, T., Bienzle, U., and Mockenhaupt, F.P. (2006). High prevalence of drug-resistance mutations in Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax in southern Ethiopia. Malar J 5, 54.
PMID:16817953(PubMed abstract) Schwartz, E., Parise, M., Kozarsky, P., and Cetron, M. (2003). Delayed onset of malaria--implications for chemoprophylaxis in travelers. N Engl J Med 349, 1510-1516.
PMID:14561793(PubMed abstract) Skarbinski, J., James, E.M., Causer, L.M., Barber, A.M., Mali, S., Nguyen-Dinh, P., Roberts, J.M., Parise, M.E., Slutsker, L., and Newman, R.D. (2006). Malaria surveillance--United States, 2004. MMWR Surveill Summ 55, 23-37.
PMID:16723971(PubMed abstract)
Cherenet, T., Sani, R.A., Speybroeck, N., Panandam, J.M., Nadzr, S., and Van den Bossche, P. (2006). A comparative longitudinal study of bovine trypanosomiasis in tsetse-free and tsetse-infested zones of the Amhara Region, northwest Ethiopia. Vet Parasitol 140, 251-258.
PMID:16675127(PubMed abstract)
Kassa, D., Petros, B., Mesele, T., Hailu, E., and Wolday, D. (2006). Characterization of peripheral blood lymphocyte subsets in patients with acute Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax malaria infections at Wonji Sugar Estate, Ethiopia. Clin Vaccine Immunol 13, 376-379.
PMID:16522780(PubMed abstract)
Ryan, J.R., Stoute, J.A., Amon, J., Dunton, R.F., Mtalib, R., Koros, J., Owour, B., Luckhart, S., Wirtz, R.A., Barnwell, J.W., et al. (2006). Evidence for transmission of Plasmodium vivax among a duffy antigen negative population in Western Kenya. Am J Trop Med Hyg 75, 575-581.
PMID:17038676(PubMed abstract)
Schunk, M., Kumma, W.P., Miranda, I.B., Osman, M.E., Roewer, S., Alano, A., Loscher, T., Bienzle, U., and Mockenhaupt, F.P. (2006). High prevalence of drug-resistance mutations in Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax in southern Ethiopia. Malar J 5, 54.
PMID:16817953(PubMed abstract)
Schwartz, E., Parise, M., Kozarsky, P., and Cetron, M. (2003). Delayed onset of malaria--implications for chemoprophylaxis in travelers. N Engl J Med 349, 1510-1516.
PMID:14561793(PubMed abstract)
Skarbinski, J., James, E.M., Causer, L.M., Barber, A.M., Mali, S., Nguyen-Dinh, P., Roberts, J.M., Parise, M.E., Slutsker, L., and Newman, R.D. (2006). Malaria surveillance--United States, 2004. MMWR Surveill Summ 55, 23-37.
PMID:16723971(PubMed abstract)
