History of Present Illness
2010 January Featured Case: An elderly woman with right arm and shoulder pain.
A woman in her eighties presented to the emergency department because of acute, rapidly progressive severe right upper arm and shoulder pain. She had been well, without fevers or chills, until approximately 6 hours earlier when, upon awakening from a nap, she noted severe sudden right arm and shoulder pain, associated with swelling and redness. She applied an over-the-counter emollient to the area. During the following 6 hours, nausea and vomiting developed, and the pain progressively increased in severity. She came to the emergency department for evaluation.
She reported lifting furniture in the days before this presentation, but there was no history of trauma to the area.
Past Medical History
She had osteoporosis, anemia, and had also recently had a fungal skin infection on her foot, which had been treated with topical creams. She had had a parathyroidectomy because of hypercalcemia and, years earlier, cellulitis of the left foot caused by Proteus and Pseudomonas. There was no history of allergies.
Allergies
There was no history of allergies.
Epidemiological History
She had not had any unusual exposures or travel, and did not smoke, drink alcohol or use illicit drugs.
Physical Examination
The blood pressure was 120/54 mm Hg, pulse 89 beats per minute, temperature 98.6°F (37.0°C), and respirations 20 breaths per minute. There was a bluish discoloration covering the entire right shoulder, with surrounding erythema and edema extending to right scapula (Figures 1 and 2). The right upper extremely and surrounding shoulder girdle were tender to light touch, and there was crepitus around the right shoulder extending anteriorly along the clavicle, superiorly to the neck, posteriorly almost to the midline spine, and inferiorly to just above the iliac crest. She was unwilling to move the arm because of pain, but was able to squeeze the right hand, with 4 out of 5 strength. The radial and ulnar pulses were 2+, and the remainder of the examination was normal.
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Figure 2. Physical findings.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 34,000 per cubic millimeter (reference range 4500-11,000), with 67% neutrophils, 22% band forms, 5% lymphocytes and 6% monocytes, and the hematocrit was 34% (ref 36.0-46.0). The level of potassium was 3.3 mmol per liter (ref 3.4-4.8), carbon dioxide 19.8 mmol per liter (ref 23.0-31.9), creatinine 1.35 mg/dL (ref 0.60-1.50), non-fasting glucose 193 mg/dL, and lactic acid 5.9 mmol per liter (ref 0.5-2.2). The levels of serum sodium, chloride, urea nitrogen and calcium were normal.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Narcotic analgesia for pain, intravenous fluids and broad-spectrum antibiotics, including clindamycin, penicillin G, vancomycin, and cefepime were administered. She was taken to the operating room emergently. Upon exploration of the upper arm, shoulder and chest wall, there was diffuse crepitus within the muscle, foul-smelling odor and dishwater-type fluid present within the tissues, and nonviable muscle. A gram stain of a specimen obtained from the right shoulder surgical field is shown (Figure 3).
Figure 3. Gram stain of superficial swab of operative site.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Gram stains of specimens obtained in the operating room from the right shoulder wound showed abundant rods, with variable gram-colorization, some of which revealed sub-terminal spores (see Figure 4, with arrows). Anaerobic cultures on blood agar dishes grew a film or 'swarm' (Figure 5) within 24 hours; the bacteria were speciated as Clostridium septicum. Gram stain of the cultured organisms is shown in Figure 6.
Pathological examination of the resected muscle tissue with hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stain is shown in Figures 7 and 8, at low- and high-magnification, respectively. Air cysts, seen in Figure 7 and Figure 8, demonstrate organisms in the tissue; both images show loss of muscle striation associated with myonecrosis.
Figure 4. Figure 3, with arrows showing spores.
Figure 5. Culture of surgical specimen, with an uninoculated plate on right.
Figure 6. Gram stain of culture growth.
Figure 7. H and E stain of muscle (low magnification)
Figure 8. H and E stain of muscle (high magnification)
Treatment and Followup
A right upper extremity forequarter amputation of the right arm and scapula, with debridement of the surrounding musculature, was performed, and a vacuum dressing was placed. Specimens of tissue were sent to the microbiology laboratory from the operating room, and broad spectrum antibiotics (penicillin, clindamycin, vancomycin, ciprofloxacin and metronidazole) were administered.
The patient returned to the operating room on the 2nd and 5th hospital days; no evidence of ongoing tissue necrosis was seen. After identification of the organism, penicillin and clindamycin were continued for three weeks. The patient received skin grafting to the chest wall site. Additional evaluation later revealed invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma of the colon.
Discussion
This patient was diagnosed with spontaneous gas gangrene (clostridial myonecrosis), caused by Clostridium septicum. In this case, the organisms seen in the primary gram stain appeared bacillary, suggesting that the cause was not a staphylococcal, streptococcal or mixed infection. There was no history of liver disease, water or raw oyster exposure, as is commonly seen in Vibrio vulnificus infections. Clostridial infections of the skeletal muscle may cause myonecrosis and are frequently rapidly progressive and life-threatening. Clostridium perfringens accounts for 80%-95% of cases of myonecrosis and is usually associated with an open wound. In contrast, C. septicum, a less common cause of myonecrosis (5-20%), is almost always spontaneous or nontraumatic [Pasternack and Swartz 2009], as seen in this case.
C. septicum is a gram-positive motile pathogen resulting in “swarming” on blood agar plates, and in comparison to C. perfringens, is more aerotolerant. C. septicum produces 4 different toxins (alpha, beta, gamma and delta), each of which inhibits leukocyte migration and function, and are thought to explain the rapid progression of disease with relatively little immune response.
The alpha toxin produced by C. septicum, which is unrelated to the alpha toxin in C. perfringens, is secreted as a pro-toxin and cleaved by host cell proteases before binding to cell surfaces via glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins. It assembles into hexameric complexes and inserts into the cell membrane, leading to cell lysis. In a mouse model of infection, strains of C. septicum constructed to have a mutation in the gene encoding the alpha toxin were unable to lyse red cells, demonstrating that the toxin is essential for C. septicum virulence and inhibition of leukocyte migration [Kennedy et al 2005].
The clinical presentation of gas gangrene can be difficult to discern from anaerobic cellulitis and necrotizing fasciitis caused by streptococcal or staphylococcal infections. The onset of gas gangrene is usually acute, and pain may be out of proportion to the initial findings on examination. Overlying skin is usually discolored and purplish in color, with associated edema, and hemorrhagic bullae may develop. Crepitus is usually, but not always, present. Patients quickly become systemically ill and often develop fever, hypotension, and tachycardia. Leukocytosis is common; hemolysis is caused by toxin production [Pasternack and Swartz 2009].
Gas gangrene caused by C. septicum is associated with a very high mortality rate, estimated to be 60%, and most patients die within 24 hours of presentation. Immediate treatment is imperative and includes emergent surgical exploration to confirm the diagnosis and definitively debride the affected area. Amputation is usually required in limbs. Penicillin has been the traditional antibiotic of choice, at the time of this publication, and clindamycin is often added due to a theoretical benefit because it halts bacterial toxin synthesis [Pasternack and Swartz 2009].
In cases of spontaneous gas gangrene, it is thought that C. septicum is spread hematogenously from the gastrointestinal tract, with entry into the blood stream via an ulceration or perforation of the bowel. Many case reports and literature reviews link spontaneous gas gangrene with malignancy. In a series of 32 patients with C. septicum infection, 50% of patients had a malignancy (compared to 11% with other Clostridial infections). Seventy percent (70%) of those with malignancy had colorectal cancer; 24% had a hematological malignancy. Other associated conditions include immunosuppression, in particular, neutropenia and diabetes [Larson et al 1995].
Final Diagnosis
Spontaneous gas gangrene (clostridial myonecrosis) caused by Clostridium septicum.
References
Kennedy, C.L., Krejany, E.O., Young, L.F., O'Connor, J.R., Awad, M.M., Boyd, R.L., Emmins, J.J., Lyras, D., and Rood, J.I. (2005). The alpha-toxin of Clostridium septicum is essential for virulence. Mol Microbiol 57, 1357-1366.
PMID:16102005(PubMed abstract) Larson, C.M., Bubrick, M.P., Jacobs, D.M., and West, M.A. (1995). Malignancy, mortality, and medicosurgical management of Clostridium septicum infection. Surgery 118, 592-597; discussion 597-598.
PMID:7570310(PubMed abstract) Pasternack MS and Swartz MN, Chapter 91, Myositis and Myonecrosis; Mandell, Douglas and Bennett, Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 2009, Elsevier, 1316-1318.
Kennedy, C.L., Krejany, E.O., Young, L.F., O'Connor, J.R., Awad, M.M., Boyd, R.L., Emmins, J.J., Lyras, D., and Rood, J.I. (2005). The alpha-toxin of Clostridium septicum is essential for virulence. Mol Microbiol 57, 1357-1366.
PMID:16102005(PubMed abstract)
Larson, C.M., Bubrick, M.P., Jacobs, D.M., and West, M.A. (1995). Malignancy, mortality, and medicosurgical management of Clostridium septicum infection. Surgery 118, 592-597; discussion 597-598.
PMID:7570310(PubMed abstract)
Pasternack MS and Swartz MN, Chapter 91, Myositis and Myonecrosis; Mandell, Douglas and Bennett, Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 2009, Elsevier, 1316-1318.
