History of Present Illness
A woman in her twenties with a prior diagnosis of relapsed refractory primary mediastinal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) in partial remission after undergoing chimeric antigen receptor T-cell immunotherapy (CAR-T) 6 months prior to presentation was admitted to the hospital with complaints of left knee pain and swelling for the past 10 days. She also reported fever to 102.8ºF for two days prior to admission. She denied any trauma, animal scratches or bites to the affected knee. Patient denied any respiratory, gastrointestinal, genitourinary symptoms or rash.
Past Medical History
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) complicated by recurrent bilateral malignant pleural effusions and malignant ascites, in partial remission at the time of presentation.
Medications
Acyclovir, Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, Levothyroxine
Social History
Patient was born in South America. She moved to Florida 10 years prior to presentation. She has a dog. She denies history of tuberculosis or known exposure. She has not been sexually active in the recent past. Patient reported no history of recent travel.
Physical Examination
Tmax 102.9 F, pulse 110 beats/minute, blood pressure 125/75, respiratory rate 18 breaths/minute. She appeared alert, oriented and in no acute distress. Significant physical examination findings were limited to left knee joint that appeared warm and swollen [Figure 1]; there was associated tenderness on palpation along the joint line as well as limited range of motion with passive and active range of motion. Rest of musculoskeletal examination was normal. No rashes were seen on skin examination.
Figure 1. Ongoing swelling of the Left Knee 12 Weeks from Initial Presentation
Studies
White blood cell count 11.41 k/uL (normal range 4.00 to 10.90), hemoglobin 10.1 g/dL (normal range 11.4 to 15.0), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 51 mm/hr (normal range 0-20), C-reactive protein 7.82 mg/dL (normal range 0-0.49). Immunoglobulin levels of IgG, IgM, and IgA were all below detectable levels.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Once blood and urine cultures were collected, patient was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics with ceftriaxone plus vancomycin for suspected infectious arthritis. Patient was evaluated by an orthopedic service and left knee joint aspiration was performed. The joint synovial fluid aspirate revealed 62,390 cells, 54% of which were neutrophils; no crystals were seen. Gram stain of the synovial fluid aspirate was negative for organisms. Blood cultures were negative on a preliminary review. On hospital day 2, ceftriaxone was changed to cefepime due to on-going fever and vancomycin was continued.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Due to high synovial fluid white cell count with neutrophil predominance and concerns for septic arthritis, patient underwent left knee joint debridement and irrigation on hospital day 2. During surgery, yellow tinged fluid was extruded from the knee, but no overt purulence was observed. Additional samples for standard bacterial, fungal and acid fast bacilli cultures were sent to the microbiology lab for investigation. Intra-operative synovial fluid sample was sent for Bacterial Detection by PCR assay to an outside laboratory. Testing for Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae by amplified detection were negative. Left knee joint pain and swelling improved after surgery but did not resolve.
Despite broad-spectrum antibiotic use, patient continued to have intermittent fever. All cultures returned negative for bacterial growth, therefore, patient’s antibiotics were discontinued after 10 days of therapy. It was felt that on-going fever may have been related to recent immunotherapy; in addition, relapse of lymphoma was considered. At that point, patient was given systemic steroids that resulted in a resolution of the fever and improvement in symptoms associated with the left knee. Patient was discharged home on hospital day 11.
In the course of the next four weeks, patient continued to have persistent left knee effusion and pain. In addition, she gradually developed pain in other joints, including the left ankle, small joints of left hand, and right shoulder.
Given her progressive symptoms, she was re-evaluated. The previous synovial fluid Bacterial Detection by PCR assay returned back positive for Ureaplasma urealyticum. All her prior cultures, including bacterial/fungal/acid fast bacilli, were finalized as negative. Urogenital Ureaplasma and Mycoplasma Species by PCR testing was performed on a urine sample; results were positive for the presence of Ureaplasma species. Based on this information, patient was diagnosed with disseminated Ureaplasma infection with left knee septic arthritis.
Treatment and Followup
Treatment with daily azithromycin was initiated. Patient received 12 weeks of treatment with azithromycin, at which point, urine Ureaplasma and Mycoplasma Species by PCR testing was negative. However, our patient continued to have significant left knee joint pain and joint effusion as well as other joint involvement (See figures 1 and 2). This was associated with continuous elevation of inflammatory markers that prompted a consideration of presence of reactive arthritis in addition to an original infectious etiology.
Due to poor clinical response, azithromycin was stopped and patient was started on the combination of levofloxacin and doxycycline. Patient also received monthly intravenous immune globulin therapy due to low monthly immunoglobulin G levels. The regimen resulted in a significant improvement in her joint symptoms (see figure 3) as well as normalization of her inflammatory markers. Patient remains in complete remission from her lymphoma.
Figure 2. Left 4th metacarpophalangeal joint involvement 12 weeks after initial presentation
Figure 3. Improved swelling of the left knee 16 Weeks after initial presentation
Discussion
Acute monoarthritis in association with fever warrants a comprehensive evaluation in order to rule out septic arthritis. In a young adult, gonococcal infection is high on a differential diagnosis along with other bacterial causes (eg, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae). Mycobacterial and fungal infections of the joint are uncommon and typically occur in patients with compromised immune system.
We present a rare case of Ureaplasma urealyticum septic arthritis in a patient with a prior diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma status post CAR-T cell immunotherapy. Ureaplasma species are known causative agents of various genitourinary infections in immunocompetent host; however, this pathogen can cause severe infections in immunocompromised patients (1). Septic arthritis with Ureaplasma species has been described in the literature, specifically in patients with severe hypogammaglobulinemia, similar to our patient (2, 3).
Diagnosis of Ureaplasma infection remains challenging as a specialized culture is required for detection of this pathogen, which is typically not performed unless a provider has high index of suspicion for this particular infection. As illustrated in our case, two sets of synovial fluid cultures were negative for any bacterial growth and the diagnosis was made only after a synovial fluid PCR assay was performed.
Our case also highlights treatment challenges as our patient initially had a very poor response to a single agent treatment with azithromycin that prompted us to use combination therapy with doxycycline and levofloxacin. In addition, correction of her severe hypogammaglobulinemia likely played a critical role in her clinical improvement.
Final Diagnosis
Septic arthritis due to Ureaplasma urealyticum
References
Taylor-Robinson D. Infections due to species of Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma: an update. Clin Infect Dis. 1996;23(4):671-684. doi:10.1093/clinids/23.4.671
PMID:8909826(PubMed abstract) Arber C, Buser A, Heim D, et al. Septic polyarthritis with Ureaplasma urealyticum in a patient with prolonged agammaglobulinemia and B-cell aplasia after allogeneic HSCT and rituximab pretreatment. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2007;40(6):597-598. doi:10.1038/sj.bmt.1705766
PMID:17618319(PubMed abstract) Balsat M, Galicier L, Wargnier A, et al. Diagnosis of ureaplasma urealyticum septic polyarthritis by PCR assay and electrospray ionization mass spectrometry in a patient with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Microbiol. 2014;52(9):3456-3458. doi:10.1128/JCM.00963-14
PMID:24958801(PubMed abstract)
Taylor-Robinson D. Infections due to species of Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma: an update. Clin Infect Dis. 1996;23(4):671-684. doi:10.1093/clinids/23.4.671
PMID:8909826(PubMed abstract)
Arber C, Buser A, Heim D, et al. Septic polyarthritis with Ureaplasma urealyticum in a patient with prolonged agammaglobulinemia and B-cell aplasia after allogeneic HSCT and rituximab pretreatment. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2007;40(6):597-598. doi:10.1038/sj.bmt.1705766
PMID:17618319(PubMed abstract)
Balsat M, Galicier L, Wargnier A, et al. Diagnosis of ureaplasma urealyticum septic polyarthritis by PCR assay and electrospray ionization mass spectrometry in a patient with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Microbiol. 2014;52(9):3456-3458. doi:10.1128/JCM.00963-14
PMID:24958801(PubMed abstract)
