History of Present Illness
A healthy male in his thirties was in his usual state of health until 5 days prior to presentation when he developed fever, chills and vomiting. Three days prior to presentation he went to urgent care, where he was given baloxavir for possible influenza. Two days prior to presentation he developed severe headache, pain in left occipital region, neck stiffness, paresthesia over the left side of his body, and unsteady gait. The day before his admission, he presented to a different ho­­­­­spital, underwent a CT Head which was unremarkable, received intravenous hydration and was discharged. The morning of admission he developed dysphagia, hoarseness of voice, and slurring of speech, leading to index hospitalization.
Past Medical History
No past medical history or allergies.
Epidemiological History
He was born in eastern Europe and moved to the United States 10 years ago. He works in finance and lives in the northeast. He is in a monogamous heterosexual relationship. He frequently travels for business, and eats frequently outdoors. Occasional use of marijuana. He saw his dentist 2 months prior to presentation.
Physical Examination
On presentation the patient was febrile to 39.4C, moderately tachycardic at 105 beats/minute. He was ill appearing and diaphoretic. His cardiovascular, pulmonary, GI and skin exam was otherwise normal. His neurologic exam was notable for mild dysarthria although speech was fully intelligible. He exhibited direction changing nystagmus in all directions. He had decreased facial sensation in V2 and V3 distributions on the left. His soft palate did not show elevation on the left side. There was subtle pronation on the left when arms were extended. His sensation was decreased in the left upper and lower extremity to a greater degree distally than proximally. Romberg sign was positive with patient falling towards the right side. A wide-based unsteady gait was observed with patient unable to perform heel-to-toe walking.
Studies
His complete blood count was notable for mild neutrophilic predominance leukocytosis: White blood cell count 9,700 [normal range: 4,000 – 10,000/uL], neutrophils 76% [normal range: 34 - 71 %]. Rest of the complete blood count, basic metabolic profile and liver function studies was within normal limits. Urine microscopy revealed 13 red blood cells [normal range: 0 - 5 /hpf] and trace protein and was otherwise normal. Two sets of blood cultures were negative. Influenza A/B PCR as well as HIV antigen/antibody testing 4th generation were negative. A CT head without contrast showed no intracranial findings. Subsequent lumbar puncture revealed cerebrospinal fluid with 460 nucleated cells (79% lymphs, 9% neutrophils), glucose of 72 mg/dL (serum glucose 124 mg/dL) and protein 68 mg/dL. Gram stain revealed many WBCs, but no organisms were seen and culture remained without growth. The meningitis/encephalitis panel by Filmarray BioFire ® was negative. A chest X-ray suggested a subtle ill-defined right upper lung opacity (Figure 1). 1. An MRI of the brain revealed an expansile T2/FLAIR signal abnormality centered in the left dorsal medulla, in the expected location of the vagus nerve nucleus, and extending along the visualized portions of the upper cervical spine, of indeterminate etiology. There was an area of abnormal tubular enhancement coursing through the center of the lesion. Imaging findings were considered indeterminate with differential diagnosis including demyelination syndrome, vasculitis (such as Behcet's disease), and less likely neoplasm (Figure 2A).
Figure 1. Chest X-ray
Figure 2. Figure 2A. MRI brain with contrast. A vertically oriented ring enhancing collection in the left dorsal medulla extending into the upper cervical cord to the level of the dens tip representing a midbrain abscess (Arrow) is seen in post contrast T1-weighted axial (2A) and sagittal (2B) images.
Figure 2A. MRI brain with contrast. A vertically oriented ring enhancing collection in the left dorsal medulla extending into the upper cervical cord to the level of the dens tip representing a midbrain abscess (Arrow) is seen in post contrast T1-weighted axial (2A) and sagittal (2B) images.
Figure 3. Figure 2B. MRI brain with contrast. A vertically oriented ring enhancing collection in the left dorsal medulla extending into the upper cervical cord to the level of the dens tip representing a midbrain abscess (Arrow) is seen in post contrast T1-weighted axial (2A) and sagittal (2B) images.
Figure 2B. MRI brain with contrast. A vertically oriented ring enhancing collection in the left dorsal medulla extending into the upper cervical cord to the level of the dens tip representing a midbrain abscess (Arrow) is seen in post contrast T1-weighted axial (2A) and sagittal (2B) images.
Figure 4. MRI brain/C-spine. Decreasing amount of FLAIR hyperintense signal and edema involving the dorsal brainstem and left cerebellum.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was treated empirically for community meningitis with vancomycin, ceftriaxone and acyclovir and initially received steroids for suspicion of bacterial meningitis. Patient defervesced but had worsening leukocytosis to 13,500. He reported symptomatic worsening with more difficulty on the left side, diplopia and worsening of his voice.
Neurologic examination also worsened with substantial dysarthria, falling immediately to the left side on Romberg and abnormal finger-to-nose with slowness and mild tremor. An MRI of the cervical and thoracic spine performed on hospital day #2 re-demonstrated the expansile lesion centered in the left right dorsal medulla, with enhancing component descending inferiorly to the level of the tip of the dens and associated cord signal abnormality predominately involving the left posterior horn to the level of C2-3. Evidence of restricted diffusion within the enhancing component was noted that was not seen on the prior examination, and increased the likelihood of infectious process with abscess formation (Figure 2B).
On hospital day #4 the patient became lethargic and desaturated requiring intubation. For the first time after admission, he developed a fever to 38.6C. A repeat MRI brain and cervical spine is shown in Figure 3. There was interval worsening and patchy new areas of enhancement in the pons and medulla in addition to the previously known tubular peripheral ring enhancing lesion which was primarily involving the left side of the dorsal part of the medulla and upper cervical spinal cord.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Extensive work up in the cerebrovascular fluid (CSF) sample including evaluation for tuberculosis, fungal infections, and viral infections was negative. Cytology was negative for malignancy and flow cytometry had no evidence of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Paraneoplastic panel was negative. After second episode of fever, repeat CSF revealed 206 nucleated cells (63% neutrophils, 31% lymphocytes, glucose 77 and protein of 72). Repeat PCR evaluation of the CSF was positive for Listeria monocytogenes which also grew in the CSF cultures and blood cultures within the next 48 hours.
Treatment and Followup
He was treated with ampicillin and gentamicin. He underwent a tracheostomy and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy. Five days after diagnosis he experienced worsening ataxia. Repeat CSF revealed a lower number of WBCs (58 nucleated cells/cumm; 96% lymphocytes), normal glucose and decreasing protein (29 mg/dL). Repeat MRI showed increased enhancement within the brainstem and cerebellum consistent with evolving rhomboencephalitis with no appreciable interval change in the size of the tubular abscess. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole was added to the regimen. He was discharged to an inpatient rehabilitation unit 1 month after admission. His neurological exam on discharge was notable for fluent speech, limited extraocular movements, asymmetric face, dysmetria on the left. Repeat MRI brain/cervical spine prior to discharge showed interval involution of the previously noted peripherally enhancing thin tubular abscess involving the dorsal brainstem/upper cervical cord, decreasing amount of FLAIR hyperintense signal and edema involving the dorsal brainstem and left cerebellum. He was treated with 3 weeks of ampicillin, gentamicin and 8 weeks of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.
Figure 5. MRI brain/C-spine. Decreasing amount of FLAIR hyperintense signal and edema involving the dorsal brainstem and left cerebellum.
Discussion
The term rhomboencephalitis was first described in 1951 referring to the inflammatory disease affecting the hindbrain (brainstem and cerebellum). In 1957 the first case of brainstem encephalitis caused by Listeria monocytogenes was reported and since then many other cases of rhomboencephalitis with a variety of etiologies have been described (1), with Listeria monocytogenes remaining the most frequently identified microorganism detected. Although the disease typically affects elderly patients with immunocompromising conditions, invasive neurolisteriosis has been described in immunocompetent adults (1). In the largest prospective evaluation of invasive Listeria spp. infections in France, among 252 patients with neurolisteriosis, 87% had encephalitis-associated symptoms and 13% had meningeal involvement without encephalitis. Clinical involvement of the brainstem, although frequently considered indicative of neurolisteriosis, was observed in only 17% of 252 patients and brain abscesses were observed in only 2% of the patients (2). Less than half of patients with neurolisteriosis survive, the majority with significant neurologic sequalae, including motor deficits and cerebellar symptoms. Combination therapy with beta-lactams and aminoglycosides or bactrim may be associated with increased survival (2).
Final Diagnosis
Listeria Rhomboencephalitis and Brainstem Abscess
References
Moragas M, Martínez-Yélamos S, Majós C, Fernández-Viladrich P, Rubio F, Arbizu T. Rhombencephalitis: a series of 97 patients. Medicine (Baltimore). 2011 Jul;90(4):256-261. doi: 10.1097/MD.0b013e318224b5af.
PMID:21694648(PubMed abstract) Charlier C, Perrodeau É, Leclercq A, Cazenave B, Pilmis B, Henry B, Lopes A, Maury MM, Moura A, Goffinet F, Dieye HB, Thouvenot P, Ungeheuer MN, Tourdjman M, Goulet V, de Valk H, Lortholary O, Ravaud P, Lecuit M; MONALISA study group. Clinical features and prognostic factors of listeriosis: the MONALISA national prospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017 May;17(5):510-519. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30521-7. Epub 2017 Jan 28. Erratum in: Lancet Infect Dis. 2017 Sep;17(9):897.
PMID:28139432(PubMed abstract)
Moragas M, Martínez-Yélamos S, Majós C, Fernández-Viladrich P, Rubio F, Arbizu T. Rhombencephalitis: a series of 97 patients. Medicine (Baltimore). 2011 Jul;90(4):256-261. doi: 10.1097/MD.0b013e318224b5af.
PMID:21694648(PubMed abstract)
Charlier C, Perrodeau É, Leclercq A, Cazenave B, Pilmis B, Henry B, Lopes A, Maury MM, Moura A, Goffinet F, Dieye HB, Thouvenot P, Ungeheuer MN, Tourdjman M, Goulet V, de Valk H, Lortholary O, Ravaud P, Lecuit M; MONALISA study group. Clinical features and prognostic factors of listeriosis: the MONALISA national prospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017 May;17(5):510-519. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30521-7. Epub 2017 Jan 28. Erratum in: Lancet Infect Dis. 2017 Sep;17(9):897.
PMID:28139432(PubMed abstract)
