History of Present Illness
Summary: A woman with a headache, fever and neck stiffness.
A young adult woman with a history of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia presented to the emergency department with a frontal headache, photophobia, fever and neck stiffness for two days.
Past Medical History
She had a history of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, pulmonary arteriovenous malformation (AVM), a lower lobectomy of the right lung, renal cell carcinoma status post a curative resection, and a cerebellar stroke related to an AVM.
Epidemiological History
The patient had recently traveled to a Caribbean island for vacation.
Physical Examination
The temperature was 100.6°F (38.1°C). There was neck stiffness and positive Kernig and Brudzinsky signs present. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count (WBC) was 12,200/mm³ (74% polymorphonuclear leukocytes), hematocrit 39%, and the platelet count was normal. A lumbar puncture was done after antibiotics had been administered. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed 6650 white blood cells (84% neutrophils, 12% lymphocytes), 11 red blood cells, protein 213 mg/dL and glucose 16 mg/dL. The chest radiograph showed no changes from previous studies after the lobectomy.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was admitted to the neurology service with a presumed diagnosis of meningitis. Antibiotics were administered intravenously and included vancomycin (1 gram) and ceftriaxone (2 grams) every twelve hours, and metronidazole (500 mg) every six hours. Cultures from the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and the blood remained negative for bacterial pathogens.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head with and without contrast was performed (Figure 1).
Figure 1. CT scan of the head.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
CT scanning of the head with contrast showed a 1.5 cm ring enhancing lesion with thin rim (Figure 1). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning could not be obtained because of the history of coils in her lungs.
Due to the proximity of the abscess to the ventricles, an aspiration of the lesion was considered to be dangerous and was not performed. Cultures remained negative, capsular antigens in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were also negative.
Treatment and Followup
The patient improved slowly during the following two weeks. She completed six weeks of vancomycin, ceftriaxone and metronidazole therapy, followed by 4 weeks of oral amoxicillin and metronidazole. Her symptoms resolved except for a mild deficit in her left leg. Follow-up CT scanning was performed on day 60 and is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Follow up CT scanning, day 60.
Discussion
Brain abscess is a focal collection within the brain parenchyma that can arise as a complication of a variety of infections, trauma or surgery. Bacteria can invade the brain either by direct spread or through hematogenous seeding. Primary infections that can directly spread to the cerebral cortex include otitis media and mastoiditis, sinusitis and dental infections.
Brain abscesses associated with bacteremia usually result in multiple abscesses that are most commonly located in the distribution of the middle cerebral artery. Episodes of bacteremia can lead to brain abscesses in patients with cyanotic congenital heart disease or arteriovenous malformations.
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), also known as Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome, is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by abnormalities of the vasculature structure in the nose, skin, lung, brain and gastrointestinal tract. Studies of prevalence show that the disease is more prevalent than previously thought. Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations are seen in 5 to 15% of patients with HHT. Brain abscesses occur in patient with pulmonary arteriovenous malformations who have right-to-left shunting, which facilitates the passage of septic and bland emboli into the cerebral circulation.
Case reports implicate a wide variety of organisms as the cause of brain abscess. Anaerobic organisms are commonly found, particularly in patients with brain abscesses originating from otorhinolaryngeal infections. Aerobic Gram positive cocci are also frequently encountered. Aerobic Gram negative rods are not commonly recovered except following neurosurgery or head trauma. In immunocompromised patients the range of organisms is broader and includes Toxoplasma, Listeria, Nocardia, Aspergillus, and Cryptococcus.
The most common symptom of a brain abscess is headache. Neck stiffness occurs in 15% of the patients and is associated with a leak into the ventricles. Changes in mental status can be seen together with focal neurological signs. Fever is seen in half of the patients. The diagnosis of brain abscess is usually suggested by findings on imaging studies. Blood cultures are positive in 15% of the cases. Lumbar puncture can be dangerous if the patient has signs of increased intracraneal hypertension.
CT scanning is not as sensitive as MRI scanning for the diagnosis of brain abscess but may be easier to obtain on an emergent basis. Early cerebritis appears as an irregular area of low density that does not enhance following contrast injection. As cerebritis evolves the lesion enlarges with thick and diffuse ring enhancement following contrast injection. The lesion later becomes encapsulated.
Successful management of a brain abscess requires a combination of antibiotics and surgical drainage for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. The duration of antibiotics should be prolonged, usually six to eight weeks. Options for empiric therapy include the use of penicillin with metronidazole or a third generation cephalosporin and metronidazole.
Final Diagnosis
Brain abscess in a patient with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (also known as Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome).
References
Cahill, D.P., Barker, F.G., 2nd, Davis, K.R., Kalva, S.P., Sahai, I., and Frosch, M.P. (2010). Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 10-2010. A 37-year-old woman with weakness and a mass in the brain. N Engl J Med 362, 1326-1333.
PMID:20375410(PubMed abstract) Mathis, S., Dupuis-Girod, S., Plauchu, H., Giroud, M., Barroso, B., Ly, K.H., Ingrand, P., Gilbert, B., Godeneche, G., and Neau, J.P. (2011). Cerebral abscesses in hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia: A clinical and microbiological evaluation. Clin Neurol Neurosurg.
PMID:22093524(PubMed abstract)
Cahill, D.P., Barker, F.G., 2nd, Davis, K.R., Kalva, S.P., Sahai, I., and Frosch, M.P. (2010). Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 10-2010. A 37-year-old woman with weakness and a mass in the brain. N Engl J Med 362, 1326-1333.
PMID:20375410(PubMed abstract)
Mathis, S., Dupuis-Girod, S., Plauchu, H., Giroud, M., Barroso, B., Ly, K.H., Ingrand, P., Gilbert, B., Godeneche, G., and Neau, J.P. (2011). Cerebral abscesses in hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia: A clinical and microbiological evaluation. Clin Neurol Neurosurg.
PMID:22093524(PubMed abstract)
