History of Present Illness
2009 October Featured Case and Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A woman in her twenties with pre-auricular pain, erythema and swelling on the left side of the face.
A woman in her twenties was well until 9 days before presentation, and 2 weeks after she had returned from the Caribbean, when pre-auricular swelling developed on the left side of the face, followed by pain and erythema. She saw her primary care provider who reportedly performed blood tests; no antibiotics were given.
Five days later, she returned because of increasing symptoms, associated with anterior ear swelling and temporomandibular joint pain. There was no history of fevers, chills, headaches, trauma, rash, oral or ear pain, or visual or hearing symptoms. On examination, there was reportedly prominent local swelling, without trismus. Cefadroxil was administered. Four days later, she went to an emergency department because of increasing symptoms, including left pre-auricular pain and swelling, temporomandibular joint tenderness and increased pain with jaw motion.
Past Medical History
She had had a tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy as a child. She was otherwise well. Skin tests for tuberculosis had been negative in the past.
Medications
Medications included cefadroxil.
Allergies
She had no allergies.
Family History
Her grandmother, who smoked, had bronchitis.
Social History
She lived in an urban area with roommates and worked in an office.
Epidemiological History
Two weeks before the onset of symptoms, she had returned from the Caribbean, where she had swum in fresh- and salt-water, and walked in a rainforest. Two months before, she had performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation on a person with a history of intravenous drug abuse. There were 2 pet cats in the house in which she lived. She was in a monogamous relationship, and did not use barrier methods during sexual activity. She drank alcohol socially on weekends and did not smoke or use illicit drugs. There was no known exposure to tuberculosis or insect bites.
Physical Examination
She appeared well. The temperature was 98.4°F (36.9°C), blood pressure 141/77 mm Hg, pulse 90 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation 100% while breathing ambient air. There was an edematous, tender region (0.5 cm by 1 cm) from the tragus anteriorly on the left side, with mild fluctuance, and moderate lymphadenopathy in the anterior cervical chain, without surrounding erythema or warmth. The oropharynx was normal, and there was no trismus. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 10,200/mm³; (reference range 4500-11,000) with neutrophils 70%, lymphocytes 21%, monocytes 7%, and eosinophils 2%; the remainder of the complete blood count, and levels of electrolytes and glucose, and tests of renal function were normal.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head with the administration of intravenous contrast (Figures 1 and 2) demonstrated enhancement of the soft tissues anterior to and surrounding the left external auditory canal, with findings suggestive of a phlegmon, including surrounding rim-like enhancement of the soft tissues and possible early abscess, with a thick proteinaceous fluid collection (1.6 cm by 1.4 cm).
Figure 1. CT of the head, axial view.
Figure 2. CT of the head, coronal view.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Clindamycin (300 mg four times daily, orally for 10 days) was begun and warm soaks were advised; she was discharged home to return for follow-up.
Three days later, she returned to the emergency department because of increasing swelling and persistent tenderness, and was also seen in the oral maxillofacial clinic. The swelling on the left appeared larger and more fluctuant than on previous examination. The left side of the neck was tender to palpation. Ultrasonography, performed at the bedside, showed a collection (1 cm in diameter). An abscess was diagnosed and incision of the lesion performed, with drainage of a small amount of white fluid. The fluid was sent for culture, which was sterile. Narcotic analgesia was prescribed in addition to the clindamycin, and she was discharged.
Two days later, she returned for follow-up because of increasing discomfort: incision, drainage of thick purulent discharge (less than 2 cc) and a fine needle aspiration of the pre-auricular lesion were performed. Gram stain of the discharge showed polymorphonuclear leukocytes and no organisms, and thioglycollate broth tube grew Propionibacterium species; cytological examination of the aspirate revealed evidence of neutrophils and histiocytes with degeneration, consistent with an abscess.
Three days after the procedure, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with the administration of gadolinium (Figures 3 and 4) demonstrated increased soft tissue swelling and enhancement of the left periauricular, facial, and temporal soft tissues with extension into the left external auditory canal. There was enhancement of the left parotid gland, post-styloid space, and temporomandibular joint, and multiple enhancing lesions within the left posterior cervical triangle consistent with lymph nodes (up to 1.7 cm in diameter), with no evidence of a drainable fluid collection.
She returned 4 days later because of increasing swelling and spontaneous yellow-pink drainage from the incision site. On examination, there was a mass (3 cm in diameter) extending from mid-anterior preauricular region to the edge of the jaw. There was a small amount of sero-sanguinous discharge present. Fine-needle aspiration was repeated, and yellow fluid (approximately 5 cc) was collected from the 5 mm incisional site. Amoxicillin-clavulanate, narcotic analgesics and ibuprofen were prescribed.
Gram stain of the new specimen revealed moderate leukocytes and few mononuclear cells, and no organisms; culture of the tissue grew (in the thioglycollate broth tube only) coagulase negative Staphylococcus of two types, and very rare Propionibacterium species grew in the anaerobic culture. The fine needle aspirate specimen was paucicellular; staining for Nocardia and acid-fast bacteria, Warthin-Starry staining, amplification testing for Mycobacterium tuberculosis nucleic acid and cultures for mycobacteria and fungi were negative. Cytological examination of the aspirate showed a cluster of epithelioid histiocytes consistent with granulomatous inflammation (Figure 5, courtesy of Richard L. Kradin, MD), and there were no organisms or evidence of malignancy seen.
Four days later, she was seen in the Infectious Diseases clinic. There was a soft mass (3 cm in diameter) in the left preauricular area extending from the parotid to the edge of the tragus, with induration and seropurulent discharge. The white cell count was 6900 cells per cubic millimeter with a normal differential; the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 38 mm per hour (reference range less than 17); the level of C-reactive protein was 2.2 mg/L (ref less than 8.0), alanine aminotransferase 88 U/L (ref 7-30) and aspartate aminotransferase 64 U/L (ref 9-32), and Hepatitis B virus surface antibody was reactive. Tests for Hepatitis B surface antigen, Hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus antibody, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies (ANCA) were negative. A chest radiograph was normal.
Figure 3. MRI of the face (T2 axial).
Figure 4. MRI of the face (T1 post gadolinium, fat-saturated).
Figure 5. Cytological exam of aspirate (Papanicolaou stain, x 250).
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Serologic testing for immunoglobulins (Ig) to Bartonella henselae were positive; the titer of IgM was 1:20 (reference range less than 1:64) and of IgG was greater than or equal to 1:1024 (reference range less than 1:20).
Test results for antibodies to B. quintana and Brucella, cryptococcal antigen, tularemia agglutination, urine Histoplasma antigen, and a skin test for tuberculosis were negative. All abscess and wound cultures for fungal and mycobacterial organisms were negative.
Treatment and Followup
At follow-up 3 weeks later, when the positive results were received, the patient felt markedly improved and there was minimal left preauricular swelling abutting the tragus and tests of liver function were normal. At that time, serological testing demonstrated negative IgM titers and a positive IgG titer at 1:512. Azithromycin (500 mg loading dose and 250 mg daily) and rifampin 300 mg twice daily, orally, were administered for a 2-week course. In follow-up, she reported resolution of her swelling without significant sequelae.
Discussion
Bartonella henselae is a small, pleomorphic gram-negative rod, of the Alphaproteobacteria class, which is fastidious, aerobic and oxidase-negative, and found intracellularly in vivo. It is distributed world-wide and has been shown to be the primary causative agent of cat-scratch disease; up to 51% of domestic cats in the United States are reported to have antibodies to B. henselae, with the mode of vector transmission between cats attributed to the cat flea, Ctenocephalides felis. B. henselae has also been implicated in multiple other clinical entities, including fever of unknown origin, neuroretinitis, endocarditis, encephalopathy, hemolytic anemia, and thrombocytopenic purpura and cases of oculoglandular syndrome, bacillary angiomatosis and bacillary peliosis hepatis (the latter two more commonly seen in immunodeficient patients) [Florin et al 2008, Slater and Welch 2005]. Clinical presentations mimicking malignancies such as lymphoma can occur; unilateral parotid enlargement, caused by B. henselae and thought to be a parotid malignancy, has also been reported [Kempf et al 2001, Ridder et al 2000].
Cat scratch disease typically presents with the development of an erythematous lesion 3-10 days after inoculation (which may resolve in 1-3 weeks) and is commonly associated with fever (which occurs in up to 60% of patients) and localized lymphadenopathy (in more than 90%)]. The nodal regions most often affected include the axillary and epitrochlear, head and neck, and groin. Suppurative lymphadenopathy may occur and require aspiration for pain relief; concern for possible tract formation after incision and drainage has been raised. The disease may remain localized and be self-limited, with a duration between 2-6 months [Florin et al 2008, Slater and Welch 2005]. Antibiotic therapy may be beneficial [Slater and Welch 2005]; azithromycin in particular has been shown to reduce the duration of lymphadenopathy in typical cat-scratch disease in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial [Bass et al 2000].
Because of the difficulty identifying the organism in pathological specimens or growing it in culture, the diagnosis of B. henselae infection is more commonly made by serologic testing for species-specific immunoglobulins, and/or by identification of B. henselae nucleic acid by polymerase chain reaction analysis. In this case, Warthin-Starry staining, a silver stain originally developed to detect for spirochetal infection and used to identify B. henselae, was performed on a paucicellular specimen and was negative. The granulomatous inflammation, identified on cytological examination of the fine needle aspirate (Figure 5), may be seen with Bartonella infection but it is not specific for it.
In presentations of facial swelling such as seen in this patient, other causes of unilateral acute cervical lymphadenitis and sialoadenitis should be considered, including M. tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria (including M. marinum when after recent water exposure), other bacterial infections (such as Francisella tularensis and syphilis), fungal infections (less common in immunocompetent individuals), and viral infections (including mumps, infectious mononucleosis caused by Epstein-Barr virus or cytomegalovirus and HIV); many of these however would more commonly present with bilateral lymphadenopathy.
Final Diagnosis
Cat-scratch disease, with parotiditis and lymphadenitis, caused by Bartonella henselae.
References
Bass, J.W., Freitas, B.C., Freitas, A.D., Sisler, C.L., Chan, D.S., Vincent, J.M., Person, D.A., Claybaugh, J.R., Wittler, R.R., Weisse, M.E., Regnery, R.L., and Slater, L.N. (1998). Prospective randomized double blind placebo-controlled evaluation of azithromycin for treatment of cat-scratch disease. Pediatr Infect Dis J 17, 447-452.
PMID:9655532(PubMed abstract) Florin, T.A., Zaoutis, T.E., and Zaoutis, L.B. (2008). Beyond cat scratch disease: widening spectrum of Bartonella henselae infection. Pediatrics 121, e1413-1425.
PMID:18443019(PubMed abstract) Kempf, V.A., Petzold, H., and Autenrieth, I.B. (2001). Cat scratch disease due to Bartonella henselae infection mimicking parotid malignancy. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 20, 732-733.
PMID:11757975(PubMed abstract) Ridder, G.J., Boedeker, C.C., Technau-Ihling, K., and Sander, A. (2005). Cat-scratch disease: Otolaryngologic manifestations and management. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 132, 353-358.
PMID:15746844(PubMed abstract) Ridder, G.J., Richter, B., Laszig, R., and Sander, A. (2000). [Parotid involvement in cat scratch disease: a differential diagnosis with increased significance]. Laryngorhinootologie 79, 471-477.
PMID:11006911(PubMed abstract) Slater LN, Welch DF, Chapter 232 Bartonella, including Cat-Scratch Disease in Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Sixth Edition, (2005) Elsevier, pp 2733-2748.
Bass, J.W., Freitas, B.C., Freitas, A.D., Sisler, C.L., Chan, D.S., Vincent, J.M., Person, D.A., Claybaugh, J.R., Wittler, R.R., Weisse, M.E., Regnery, R.L., and Slater, L.N. (1998). Prospective randomized double blind placebo-controlled evaluation of azithromycin for treatment of cat-scratch disease. Pediatr Infect Dis J 17, 447-452.
PMID:9655532(PubMed abstract)
Florin, T.A., Zaoutis, T.E., and Zaoutis, L.B. (2008). Beyond cat scratch disease: widening spectrum of Bartonella henselae infection. Pediatrics 121, e1413-1425.
PMID:18443019(PubMed abstract)
Kempf, V.A., Petzold, H., and Autenrieth, I.B. (2001). Cat scratch disease due to Bartonella henselae infection mimicking parotid malignancy. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 20, 732-733.
PMID:11757975(PubMed abstract)
Ridder, G.J., Boedeker, C.C., Technau-Ihling, K., and Sander, A. (2005). Cat-scratch disease: Otolaryngologic manifestations and management. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 132, 353-358.
PMID:15746844(PubMed abstract)
Ridder, G.J., Richter, B., Laszig, R., and Sander, A. (2000). [Parotid involvement in cat scratch disease: a differential diagnosis with increased significance]. Laryngorhinootologie 79, 471-477.
PMID:11006911(PubMed abstract)
Slater LN, Welch DF, Chapter 232 Bartonella, including Cat-Scratch Disease in Mandell, Douglas and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, Sixth Edition, (2005) Elsevier, pp 2733-2748.
