History of Present Illness
IDSA 2003 Summary: A man had lower extremity pain, fever and malaise after cardiac surgery. An elderly man, seven months after aortic valve replacement with a bovine allograft for aortic stenosis, was admitted with complaints of fevers, chills, bilateral intermittent lower extremity and back pain, and weight loss of 30 pounds (13.6 kg) during the preceding two months. The patient's aortic valve replacement surgery had been complicated by atrial fibrillation. He had received beta-blocker therapy and converted to normal sinus rhythm.
Five months before admission, he had an episode of sudden right calf pain while riding his bicycle. He was seen in the Emergency Department where an evaluation for deep venous thrombosis, including a venous Doppler study, was negative. Two months later, he had an episode of abrupt onset thigh and calf pain in the left leg, with edema and erythema over the dorsum of the left foot. A venous Doppler examination of the left limb was negative for deep venous thrombosis. Cellulitis was diagnosed and he was treated as an outpatient with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and oral cephalexin for fourteen days. His lower extremity symptoms increased over the next two weeks. Both legs were tender to palpation, but no longer edematous or warm.
Two months before admission, he had a non-invasive ultrasound duplex scan of the arteries of both lower extremities, which showed a reduced systolic pressure and monophasic waveform in the left posterior tibialis artery. At the time of admission, he reported generalized weakness and malaise that had increased over the previous two months. His leg pains were not improving with either antibiotics or the NSAIDs therapy, and backaches had begun, which were worse with movement and at night. Fevers and chills occurred mostly in the evenings. A loss of appetite had resulted in a 30 lb (13.6 kg) weight loss.
He had a chronic mildly productive cough with clear mucoid sputum, which had not changed in character or severity since the time of surgery. Two months before admission, he had had a recurrence of genital herpes, one of many recurrences over the last thirty years, which had resolved spontaneously after 5 days. He denied chest pain, shortness of breath, headache, photophobia, abdominal pain, dysuria, hematuria, dental procedures or injections of any sort (intravenous drug use or acupuncture) after surgery, or other invasive procedures.
Past Medical History
There was a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, depression, hypothyroidism, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and syncope twice before valve replacement.
Medications
Medications included furosemide (40 mg daily), lisinopril (5 mg daily), metoprolol (100 mg twice daily), lovastatin (20 mg each night), multi-vitamin supplement, and ibuprofen (800 mg three times daily as needed for back pain).
Social History
He was retired and lived with his wife.
Epidemiological History
He was monogamous with his wife. He had traveled across the country more than 30 years before. He reported moderate remote tobacco and alcohol use.
Physical Examination
The patient was alert and oriented to time, place and person. He appeared wasted and fatigued but was not in acute distress. The temperature was 103°F (39.4°C), pulse 75 beats per minute, blood pressure 105/50 mm Hg, and oxygen saturation was 97% on 2 liters of supplemental oxygen. He had fair dentition and moderate periodontal disease. There was a new 2/6 systolic murmur over the left 2nd intercostal space, and diffuse non-focal weakness (4 of 5) was noted in proximal muscle groups in both upper and lower extremities.
Studies
The complete blood count (CBC) included white blood count of 12,600/mm³ (85% neutrophils, 7% lymphocytes, 6% monocytes, 1% eosinophils, and 1% basophils), hematocrit 30%, and hemoglobin 10.1 g/dL; the remainder was normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 87 mm/hour. The level of C-reactive protein was 10.9, INR 1.4, sodium was 131 mmol/L, and glucose 128 mg/dL. Other chemistry tests, liver function tests, B12, folate, haptoglobin, anti-globulin (Coomb’s) tests and the urinalysis were normal. Stool occult blood was negative. Iron, transferrin and total iron binding (TIBC) were all decreased; ferritin was elevated. Lactic dehydrogenase was elevated at 333 U/L. Testing for antibodies to human immunodefiency virus (HIV) and serology tests for hepatitis A, B and C viruses were negative; the RPR was non-reactive.
A chest radiograph had no acute infiltrates.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Blood and urine cultures drawn on admission were negative. Isolator tubes for fungal and mycobacterial organisms were sterile. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a mobile density (3.0 centimeters by1.2 cm) on the aortic root side of the aortic valve that was continuous with an abscess in the posterior aspect of the aortic ring. There were less well-defined fibrinous strands attached to the aortic leaflet tips. These findings were confirmed on a subsequent trans-esophageal echocardiogram.
Vancomycin, gentamicin and rifampin were administered. The patient continued to have daily fevers to 101-103°F (38.3-39.4°C) and his constitutional symptoms increased. Metronidazole and ceftriaxone were added to the antibiotic regimen on fourth and sixth hospital days, respectively.
On the eighth hospital day, he complained of blurry vision bilaterally. Fundoscopic examination was consistent with vitritis and endophthalmitis. A vitreal tap was done and fluid was sent for culture. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head showed scattered small areas of hyperintensity, involving multiple areas and consistent with scattered small infarcts. On the FLAIR images, there was loss of the normal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) signal at small areas of the central sulcus bilaterally, that was thought to represent small amounts of blood or pus in the subarachnoid space. MR angiography of the great vessels of the neck and the circle of Willis was normal.
On the ninth hospital day, the patient became lethargic. He suffered a cardiac arrest and expired.
A limited autopsy of the chest revealed pulmonary congestion and cardiomegaly. There was a large (4.3cm by 3.5 cm) vegetation of the bio-prosthetic aortic valve and an abscess of the aortic annulus. Figure 1 shows the large aortic vegetation, and Figure 2, after the removal of the vegetation, shows a divided suture on the bovine aortic valve allograft (see arrows).
Figure 1. Aortic valve vegetation.
Figure 2. Divided suture on allograft.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The abscess fluid and valve tissue were cultured, with heavy growth of Aspergillus fumigatus in all specimens. Histopathology showed tissue invasion by fungal hyphae on Wright stain (Figure 3) and Gomori methenamine silver stain (Figures 4 and 5).
Figure 3. Valve tissue, septate hyphae on Wright’s stain.
Figure 4. Valve tissue with hyphal invasion (silver stain).
Figure 5. Valve tissue with hyphal elements (silver stain).
Treatment and Followup
Discussion
Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) occurring sixty days to twelve months after valve replacement is most commonly due to coagulase-negative staphylococci, Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus, and Streptococcus species. Fungi cause between 10-15% of PVE during this time period. Aspergillus may infect a prosthetic heart valve. Diagnosis may be difficult since blood cultures are usually negative, as in this case. Surgery is generally necessary for cure.
Final Diagnosis
Aspergillus fumigatus prosthetic valve endocarditis.
References
