History of Present Illness
2010 IDSA Fellows' Day Case Presentation Summary: A man presented with fevers, chills increasing headache and rash.
A man in his thirties from Brazil was well until 10 days before presentation, when fevers, chills, and increasing frontal headache developed. Three days later, arthritis and arthralgias developed and gradually increased. Five days before presentation, a rash began on his ankles, then spread to involve his legs, trunk and ears. He was admitted to another hospital, and ceftriaxone and doxycycline were begun. He was transferred to a tertiary care hospital.
Past Medical History
As a child, he had had an episode of rash, fever and joint swelling that resolved spontaneously. Five years before this presentation, an episode of fever with rash occurred, which resolved after a course of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Medications
Before this illness, he was not taking any medications.
Epidemiological History
He was born in Brazil and had spent time on a farm with cows, horses and chickens as a child. He immigrated to the United States as a teen, and lived in a coastal area of New England with his relatives. He worked in- and out-of-doors, and owned 2 cats. He visited Brazil frequently, and had returned for 3 months within the previous year. He was sexually active with women only, had had multiple lifetime partners and reported intermittent use of barrier protection. He did not report relations with sex workers, and did not smoke, drink alcohol or use injection drugs. He had had no sick contacts, and had played sports the previous week without difficulty.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared uncomfortable. The blood pressure was 120/72 mm Hg, pulse 93 per minute, temperature 102.9°F (39.4°C), respirations 20 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation 90% while breathing ambient air. There was an enanthem, without exudates, in the oropharynx. There was no conjunctival injection. There were shotty right supraclavicular nodes, and bilateral inguinal lymphadenopathy (greater than 2 cm in diameter). Breath sounds were decreased at the right base and crackles were heard at the left base. There was a palpable splenic tip, and the remainder of the abdomen was normal. The ankles and knees were markedly edematous, and the wrists less so, without edema of non-joint areas. The skin was anicteric, with a raised “dermal” erythematous infiltrate over the eyebrows, nose, cheeks and ears (Figure 1). There were several similar lesions (2-5 cm in diameter) on the abdomen and back, and a diffuse blanching, erythematous and blotchy rash on both legs to the groin (Figures 2 and 3), and both arms to the shoulders, including soles, but not the palms.
Figure 1. Physical findings on forehead.
Figure 2. Physical findings on foot.
Figure 3. Physical findings on foot.
Studies
The white cell count was 4,400 cells/uL (reference range 4,000-11,000 cells/uL), with 85% neutrophils, 12% lymphocytes, 2% monocytes, and hematocrit 32% (ref. 36-48). The level of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 107 IU/L (ref. 0-40), and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 139 IU/L (ref. 0-40); the remainder of the comprehensive metabolic panel was normal.
A lumbar puncture was performed; analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed 1 white cell/uL, protein 39 mg/dL and glucose of 79 mg/dL. A gram stain of the CSF showed no cells or organisms and a smear for parasites was negative.
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest (Figures 4 and 5) revealed bilateral axillary and mediastinal lymphadenopathy (up to 2.6 cm by 1.7 cm), and bibasilar consolidation with associated effusions. CT of the abdomen and pelvis revealed lymphadenopathy in the left paraaortic, right iliac chain and bilateral inguinal regions (up to 2.5 cm by 1.7 cm), and splenomegaly.
Figure 4. CT of the chest.
Figure 5. CT of the chest.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
He was admitted to the medicine floor and ceftriaxone and doxycycline were continued. Increasing dyspnea with rapidly increasing oxygen requirement developed, and 100% supplemental oxygen by face mask was administered. He was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Antibiotic coverage was broadened to include vancomycin, piperacillin-tazobactam, streptomycin and doxycycline. Temperatures up to 103°F (39.4°C) were recorded nightly.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A skin biopsy was obtained; pathological examination of the tissue with hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stain showed scattered superficial to deep dermal perivascular, periappendageal and perineural granulomas (Figure 6), consistent with leprosy. Modified acid-fast bacilli and Fite stains revealed numerous bacilli in the granulomatous foci. (Fite stain is shown in Figure 7.)
A biopsy of an enlarged lymph node was also obtained, and hematoxylin and eosin stain (Figure 8) revealed multiple granulomas with focal areas of central necrosis and associated acute inflammation. Within these granulomas, there were many histiocytes with large cytoplasmic vacuoles filled with abundant, faintly staining beaded bacilli. The organisms were acid-fast by modified acid-fast staining and by Fite staining; the latter is shown in Figure 9.
All other testing, including for HIV, was negative.
Figure 6. H and E stain of skin biopsy.
Figure 7. Fite stain of skin biopsy.
Figure 8. H and E stain of lymph node.
Figure 9. Fite stain of lymph node.
Treatment and Followup
The patient’s symptoms had fully resolved by the 5th hospital day and he was discharged home. He returned to the Infectious Disease clinic one month later to start a course of rifampin, dapsone and minocycline for multibacillary Hansen’s Disease. During first year of treatment, two episodes of rash occurred and resolved spontaneously. At follow-up after 18 months of therapy, he was doing well; 24 months of therapy was planned.
Discussion
This previously-healthy man presented with fever, headache, rash, arthritis, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, transaminase elevation and possibly pneumonitis. The differential diagnosis included acute viral infections, such as HIV, Epstein Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and parvovirus. Syphilis was another possibility. His exposure history and rapid respiratory decline raised concerns about tularemia, though the rash is atypical for this disease. His rash was thought to be inconsistent with a viral exanthem and a biopsy revealed Fite stain-positive organisms within granulomas, thus providing the clinical diagnosis of Hansen’s Disease.
The patient likely acquired Mycobacterium leprae infection as a child in Brazil, followed by many years of asymptomatic disease. A type 2 reaction, or erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL), is a complication of lepromatous leprosy: it involves a cytokine storm that results from the release of large amounts of mycobacterial antigens, typically resulting in fever and other systemic symptoms such as malaise, iritis, neuritis, myositis, lymphadenitis, arthritis, dactylitis and orchitis. While this reaction generally occurs during antimycobacterial treatment, it occasionally occurs in untreated individuals, as in this case. The episodes of fever and rash in his medical history may have been unrecognized ENL-type reactions that resolved spontaneously. A variant of ENL with polymorphous lesions has been termed “erythema polymorphous-like reaction,” in which lesions may not be nodular [Cuevas et al. 2007].
Mycobacterium leprae is transmitted through aerosol spread of nasal secretions. The countries with the highest prevalence rates of Hansen’s Disease are India, Brazil, and Indonesia [WHO 2010]. Due to its highly variable incubation period of up to 30 years, and the increasing numbers of foreign-born individuals residing in developed countries, Hansen’s Disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis of rash in North America.
Final Diagnosis
Hansen's Disease, type 2 reaction (variant of erythema nodosum leprosum), caused by Mycobacterium leprae.
References
(2010). Global leprosy situation, 2010. Wkly Epidemiol Rec 85, 337-348.
PMID:20830851(PubMed abstract) Cuevas, J., Rodriguez-Peralto, J.L., Carrillo, R., and Contreras, F. (2007). Erythema nodosum leprosum: reactional leprosy. Semin Cutan Med Surg 26, 126-130.
PMID:17544965(PubMed abstract)
(2010). Global leprosy situation, 2010. Wkly Epidemiol Rec 85, 337-348.
PMID:20830851(PubMed abstract)
Cuevas, J., Rodriguez-Peralto, J.L., Carrillo, R., and Contreras, F. (2007). Erythema nodosum leprosum: reactional leprosy. Semin Cutan Med Surg 26, 126-130.
PMID:17544965(PubMed abstract)
