History of Present Illness
Summary: A man with fever and bullae on his skin.
A man in his fifties was admitted with nephrolithiasis and urosepsis from Escherichia coli. In the hospital, he developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), requiring prolonged ventilatory support and a tracheostomy.
Four weeks into his hospitalization, he developed fevers, respiratory distress, and left lower lobe pneumonia by chest radiograph, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus grew on sputum culture. He was treated with vancomycin, with gradual improvement. Nine days into his course of vancomycin, fever recurred, with no clear source. The next day, he developed a rash.
Medications
Medications included vancomycin.
Physical Examination
The temperature was 103.2°F (39.6°C) and the heart rate 84 beats/minute. The skin examination revealed erythematous areas primarily in both axillae, the middle of the back, and the left thigh. On the erythematous base, there were tight bullae, which expressed yellow, serous, nonpurulent fluid when opened. The remainder of the examination was normal. (See Figures 1 and 2.)
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Figure 2. Physical finding.
Studies
The white cell count (WBC) was 15,700 cells/mm³ (84% neutrophils, 9% lymphocytes, 3% monocytes, and 3% eosinophils), and the hematocrit 28.6%. Cultures, including for gonorrhea, of the bullous fluid were negative.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The diagnosis was established by a skin biopsy. The hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stain showed an inflammatory rich infiltrate at the dermal-epidermal junction with numerous neutrophils (Figure 3). Immuno-fluorescent stain for immunoglobulin (Ig) A showed IgA deposition on the basement membrane at the dermal-epidermal junction (Figure 4).
Figure 3. Biopsy results.
Figure 4. Immunofluorescent stain.
Treatment and Followup
The vancomycin was discontinued, and the bullae gradually resolved after one week. As this was immunologically mediated, the patient should be considered allergic to vancomycin.
Discussion
The histology demonstrates necrolysis at the dermal-epidermal junction with IgA deposition seen on immunofluorescence staining. This is diagnostic of bullous dermatosis from vancomycin.
Dermatitis herpetiformis typically presents with grouped vesicles. Bullous pemphigoid, though possible, typically occurs later in life, involves mucosal surfaces and is not triggered by medication. Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) and erythema multiforme should be considered; however, the lack of mucosal involvement (for TEN) and the histopathologic tissue reaction exclude these diagnoses.
Final Diagnosis
Linear IgA bullous dermatosis from vancomycin.
References
Carpenter, S., Berg, D., Sidhu-Malik, N., Hall, R.P., 3rd, and Rico, M.J. (1992). Vancomycin-associated linear IgA dermatosis. A report of three cases. J Am Acad Dermatol 26, 45-48.
PMID:1531056(PubMed abstract) Neughebauer, B.I., Negron, G., Pelton, S., Plunkett, R.W., Beutner, E.H., and Magnussen, R. (2002). Bullous skin disease: an unusual allergic reaction to vancomycin. Am J Med Sci 323, 273-278.
PMID:12018672(PubMed abstract)
Carpenter, S., Berg, D., Sidhu-Malik, N., Hall, R.P., 3rd, and Rico, M.J. (1992). Vancomycin-associated linear IgA dermatosis. A report of three cases. J Am Acad Dermatol 26, 45-48.
PMID:1531056(PubMed abstract)
Neughebauer, B.I., Negron, G., Pelton, S., Plunkett, R.W., Beutner, E.H., and Magnussen, R. (2002). Bullous skin disease: an unusual allergic reaction to vancomycin. Am J Med Sci 323, 273-278.
PMID:12018672(PubMed abstract)
