History of Present Illness
2006 November Featured Case Summary: A woman with a sore throat, neck fullness and respiratory symptoms.
A woman in her thirties was in good health, in mid-winter, until eight days before admission when she developed sore throat, neck fullness and felt feverish. She was seen in urgent care the following day. The pharynx was injected and bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy was noted. A throat culture was negative and viral pharyngitis was diagnosed. She was discharged to home, with rest, gargles and lozenges advised.
During the next six days, her throat soreness improved but dry cough, nausea, intermittent vomiting and lightheadedness developed. Contacted at home by phone, she was advised to continue with conservative management including over-the-counter analgesics and anti-tussive medication.
One week after the onset of symptoms, dyspnea on exertion and wheezing developed; she presented to the emergency room for further evaluation.
Past Medical History
She had previously been in good health.
Medications
She was on no medications prior to this illness.
Epidemiological History
The patient lived alone, worked in an office, and did not have contact with animals. She did not smoke, and occasionally drank alcohol. There was no history of recent travel.
Physical Examination
In the emergency department, the patient appeared fatigued. The temperature was initially 97.6°F (36.4°C), blood pressure was 120/74 mm/Hg, pulse 124 beats per minute, and respirations 20 breaths per minute. Oxygen saturation was 95% on room air, and decreased to 91% with ambulation. The neck revealed bilateral tender lymphadenopathy and swelling; there was no trismus. The base of the right lung was dull to percussion with decreased fremitus; breath sounds were decreased in both bases, and inspiratory crackles were heard in the right base. The remainder of the examination was normal
Studies
The white blood cell count was 15,400 cells/mm³ (67% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 18% bands, 3% immature forms, 7% lymphocytes, 5% monocytes) and the hematocrit was 44.3%. Plasma creatinine was 0.7 mg/dL (normal 0.6-1.5 mg/dL) albumin 2.6 grams/dL (normal 3.3-5.0 grams/dL), globulin 3.4 grams/dL (normal 2.6-4.1 grams/dL), total bilirubin 2.6 mg/dL (normal 0.0-1.0 mg/dL), direct bilirubin 1.6 mg/dL (normal 0-0.4 mg/dL), alkaline phosphatase 280 U/liter (normal 30-100 U/liter), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 180 U/liter (normal 7-30 U/liter), and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 123 U/liter (normal 9-32 U/liter). Carbon dioxide was 18.3 mEq/liter (normal 23-32 mEq/liter). A rapid enzyme immunoassay (EIA) test of a nasal swab was negative for Influenzavirus A and B antigens.
A chest radiograph, shown in Figure 1, revealed patchy opacities involving the right upper lobe, left lower lobe, and right middle lobe, which were thought to represent multilobar bronchopneumonia.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph on admission.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
In the emergency department, azithromycin, albuterol nebulizers and two liters of intravenous normal saline were administered. An evaluation by otorhinolaryngology did not show any airway deviation or obstruction. Blood and sputum cultures were sent. The patient was admitted to the hospital. Within hours, the temperature rose to 101.5°F (38.6°C), supine blood pressure was 120/65 mm Hg with pulse 114 beats, standing 110/50 mm Hg with pulse 147 beats per minute.
On the first hospital day, combination therapy with ampicillin-sulbactam was initiated. On the second hospital day, a repeat chest radiograph showed the pulmonary infiltrates and a right-sided pleural effusion (Figure 2). Two anaerobic blood culture bottles, of four total blood culture bottles, were positive. A gram stain of the positive culture is shown in Figure 3. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed patchy air space disease in the lung bases, a right pleural effusion, and a spleen with a span of 15-centimeters.
During the next three days, the patient began to feel better, with diminishing fevers. The white blood cell count fell to 10,300 cells/mm³ (78% neutrophils and 15% lymphocytes, 6% monocytes). The following day, the temperature increased and was associated with neck discomfort, swelling and a white blood cell count of 13,400 cells/mm³ (92% neutrophils, 5% lymphocytes and 3% monocytes).
Figure 2. Chest x-ray, hospital day 2.
Figure 3. Gram stain of blood culture.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
On the fourth hospital day, a direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) test of a sputum sample was positive for Influenzavirus B antigen. On re-examination, a left neck mass measuring 4-centimeters in diameter had developed. CT scanning of the neck revealed an abscess of the left neck deep to the sternocleidomastoid and extending into the retropharyngeal space with occlusion of the left jugular vein. A necrotic lymph node was also seen on the left. (See Figure 4.) Ultrasonography of the neck showed a large abscess in the sternocleidomastoid muscle and an occluded left internal jugular vein.
The laboratory identified the organism grown in the blood culture bottles as fusiform bacteria. Intravenous penicillin G and clindamycin were administered. The neck abscess was incised and drained without complications; thirty cubic centimeters of purulent material was aspirated. Two day later, the organism was speciated as Fusobacterium necrophorum.
Results of laboratory tests for Influenzavirus A, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, parainfluenza, Legionella, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and other respiratory bacterial pathogens were negative.
Figure 4. CT scan of neck.
Treatment and Followup
The patient clinically improved after the surgical drainage procedure. Intravenous penicillin was continued and oral metronidazole was begun, and she completed a six-week course. The patient recovered completely.
Discussion
This patient initially presented with a syndrome suggestive of a viral illness, and later shown to be due to Influenzavirus B. The rapid enzyme immunoassay (EIA) test of a nasal swab was performed in the emergency department and was negative for influenzavirus. However, this test has a lower sensitivity than that of the direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) test, which was performed after her admission to the hospital. This initial illness was complicated by the development of Lemierre's syndrome.
Lemierre's syndrome is also known as jugular vein suppurative thrombophlebitis. One published review [Chirinos et al 2002] calculated that most cases of Lemierre's syndrome (73%) occurred in patients aged 16–25 years, most of whom had been previously healthy. This entity usually begins with pharyngitis. A characteristic of this syndrome is that infection from the oropharynx extends into the carotid sheath vessels, classically causing thrombosis in the jugular vein. The delay between onset of pharyngitis and clinical thrombophlebitis was usually less than one week. Of those patients with jugular vein infection, nearly all are observed to have septic pulmonary emboli. Bacteremia is common and septic emboli to other sites are also reported, with most patients having evidence of emboli by the time of diagnosis.
The most common causative organism is the anaerobe Fusobacterium necrophorum, although several other oropharyngeal organisms have been associated with this clinical entity. In the above-mentioned review, authors found that in 70% of the cases reviewed, Fusobacterium necrophorum in the blood was the first clue to the diagnosis, as it was in this case. Lemierre, however, who originally described this clinical syndrome, warned that fever developing several days after sore throat, especially with evidence of embolic phenomena, should raise suspicion for this disease.
Final Diagnosis
Influenzavirus B infection complicated by Lemierre's syndrome caused by Fusobacterium necrophorum.
References
Chirinos, J.A., Lichtstein, D.M., Garcia, J., and Tamariz, L.J. (2002). The evolution of Lemierre syndrome: report of 2 cases and review of the literature. Medicine (Baltimore) 81, 458-465.
PMID:12441902(PubMed abstract)
