History of Present Illness
Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A woman with weight loss and cough.
Four months before this presentation, a woman in her thirties was seen at an outside medical facility with a one-week history of nonproductive cough (The presence or absence of purulent sputum can be a useful diagnostic clue. "Typical" bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae tend to cause productive cough, whereas viral or atypical pathogens more often do not.) and night sweats (Night sweats are a relatively non-specific symptom but are not a typcial feature of most common respiratory infections. Consideration of uncommon symptoms can help guide the differential diagnosis. A number of infections can cause night sweats, but the combination of cough and night sweats raises the possibility of tuberculosis.). Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) showed left upper lobe consolidation and scattered bilateral pulmonary nodules. The patient was treated with levofloxacin and the symptoms abated.
In the following two months, she noted a poor appetite and a 20-pound weight loss (Significant weight-loss is an important "red flag" symptom, and is very unusual without serious underlying illness. Two months of weight loss suggests a persistent catabolic state, which would be quite uncommon in most common pulmonary infections seen in the US.). Three weeks before this presentation, left pleuritic chest pain and cough productive of yellow sputum occurred. There was no recurrence of fever, chills or night sweats.
Past Medical History
She had a history of anemia.
Medications
Medications included iron sulfate.
Epidemiological History
The patient was originally from India (Travel history, including distant history is critical to infectious disease diagnosis since a number of important pathogens can establish persistent latent infection that can reactivate years after exposure.) and had last visited more than five years earlier. There was no known exposure to tuberculosis and no animal exposure.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared tired, with a normal temperature and vital signs. 0xygen saturation was 100% while breathing ambient air. Examination of the lungs revealed fine crackles over the left upper lung field; no wheezes were heard. There was no hepatosplenomegaly or rash, and the remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 9,900 cells/mm³ (reference range 4500-11,000); with a normal differential (The differential - that is, the relative numbers of different white blood cell types - can provide diagnostic information. Typical serious acute bacterial infections tend to cause a "Left Shift", with elevated polymorphonuclear leukocytes, also called "polys" or neutrophils, and bands - immature neutrophils - and decreased lymphocytes and eosinophils. The absence of a left shift here is a sign that this may not be a typical acute bacterial infection.) (59% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 2% bands, 30% lymphocytes, 6% monocytes, 3% eosinophils), hematocrit 32.3% (reference range 36.0-46.0 in women), mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 68 fL (This is a microcytic anemia. Most typically associated with iron deficiency, it can also be seen in other conditions, such as chronic inflammatory states or hereditary diseases.) (reference range 80-100), and platelets 350,000/mm³. Results of electrolytes and liver function testing were normal. Radiography of the chest is shown in Figures 1 and 2.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph.
Figure 2. Chest radiograph, lateral view.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest is shown in Figures 3 and 4.
Figure 3. Chest CT scan.
Figure 4. Chest CT scan.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Chest radiography revealed a large left upper lobe mass with cavitation (Only a limited number of pathogens will cause cavities to form in the lung, narrowing the differential diagnosis.) and CT scanning showed a left upper lobe mass with cavitation and bilateral pulmonary nodules (Figures 1 through 4 above).
A purified protein derivative (PPD) Mantoux test (In this test, a partially purified extract of Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacteria is injected intradermally. If the person has been exposed to TB, T-lymphocyte cells will migrate to the injection site, causing an area of induration, or skin hardening.) was administered and a reaction of 15 centimeters induration recorded. Induced sputum revealed 4+ acid-fast bacilli (Mycobacteria have an outer layer containing mycophenolic acid making them difficult to stain and visualize by microscopy. Auramine O can stain mycobacteria and the stain does not come off with an acid wash, giving them the name acid-fast.) by Auramine O staining. After three weeks (Mycobacteria grow much more slowly than most typical bacteria. This can make diagnosis challenging and often treatment decisions must be made before culture and sensitivity data are known.), sputum cultures grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Figure 5), which was sensitive to all antibiotics tested.
Figure 5. Acid-fast (Ziehl-Neelson) stain from culture.
Treatment and Followup
Isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol were administered initially; the ethambutol was discontinued after the sensitivity results were known. Pyrazinamide was administered for the first two months and isoniazid and rifampin for 6 months. Follow-up sputum obtained at 2 months revealed no acid-fast bacilli on staining and culture.
Discussion
The classic presentation for pulmonary tuberculosis includes upper lobe consolidation, weight loss and night sweats. Those features were present in this case, however the diagnosis may have been delayed by the empiric therapy for pneumonia with levofloxacin, which has activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
In a study of patients with culture-confirmed tuberculosis, initial empiric therapy with a fluoroquinolone was associated with a delay in initiation of antituberculous therapy [Dooley et al 2002]. Thus, clinicians should consider the diagnosis of tuberculosis in patients with upper lobe cavitation or infiltrates, especially if they have epidemiologic risk factors for acquisition or reactivation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Final Diagnosis
Pulmonary infection caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
References
Dooley KE, Golub J, Goes FS, Merz W, Sterling TS. Empiric treatment of community-acquired pneumonia with fluoroquinolones, and delays in the treatment of tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis. 2002 Jun 15;34(12):1607-12. Epub 2002 May 23.
PMID:12032896(PubMed abstract)
