History of Present Illness
2006 February Featured Case and Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A man with shortness of breath and respiratory failure.
A man in his thirties (Age and gender are often a critical factor in ID diagnosis affecting both the spectrum of illness and type of organisms involved.) presented during the winter season (Certain infections are very common during a particular season of the year.) with progressive shortness of breath and fever (The combination of breathing difficulty and fever should arouse suspicion for lung infection.).
Four days before admission (It is important to elicit the onset, duration and progression of symptoms as some infections progress rapidly and can be fatal if not diagnosed and managed in time.), the patient stayed home from work (Taking time off from work may be an indication of the severity of symptoms.) due to fevers and flu-like symptoms, which included nausea, generalized malaise and fatigue. He traveled out of town the following two days (The timeline relating the onset of illness to the travel history is very important, as some infections have early and late stages of symptoms. In addition, it is important to know the destination and details of activities and the eating and drinking habits during travel - for example, drinking unfiltered tap water. Eliciting a history of exposure to air conditioning units and water sources during travel and learning if any travel companions are suffering from a similar illness that suggests a common exposure or source of infection are also important considerations. All these factors will influence the differential diagnoses) and continued to feel unwell.
One day before admission, he presented to the emergency room of an outside hospital with fever to 101°F (38.3°C), vomiting and diarrhea. Five liters of intravenous fluid were infused and a prescription for ciprofloxacin (Whenever possible the exact details of previous therapy should be sought, as previous treatment may influence future choice of antibiotics since an organism already exposed to an antibiotic may have developed resistance to it.) was given for presumed infectious gastroenteritis (Not all patients presenting with vomiting and diarrhea have gastroenteritis. Other infections - including, at times, pneumonia - may present with a preponderance of GI symptoms). The patient returned the following day with worsening shortness of breath and the sensation that his lungs were filling with fluid. There was no history of (Thoroughly eliciting the absence of some symptoms may be as, and sometimes even more, important than the presence of other symptoms.) rashes, arthralgias, chest pain, neck stiffness, rectal bleeding, hematemesis, headache, sinus pressure, cough or hemoptysis.
On presentation to the outside hospital, the patient was able to speak in full sentences (Whenever a patient presents with breathing difficulty, the ability to speak in full sentences can be a good early and objective measure of the severity. If one is not able to speak in full sentences then breathing may be severely compromised.) and appeared diaphoretic (It is very important to determine if the patient looks unwell or toxic, as that may indicate the need for aggressive and broad-spectrum therapy, often with supportive measures.). The temperature (A normal temperture is generally considered to be 97.0-99.9 degree Fahrenheit.) was 97.9°F (36.6°C), pulse (Normal: 60-100 beats per minute.) 118 beats per minute, blood pressure (A normal systolic blood pressure usually ranges between 90-139 mm Hg and normal diastolic between 60-85 mm Hg.) 133/73 mm Hg and the oxygen saturation (Normal: 95-100% while breathing ambient air.) ranged between 90-95% on 100% inspired oxygen (This patient has tachycardia and hypoxia even while breathing a high concentration of oxygen. This may suggest significant lung involvement, but systemic infection or anemia can cause this picture even in the absence of lung involvement. The respiratory rate has not been mentioned but can safely be predicted to be raised to compensate for the low oxygen saturation.). An echocardiogram did not show any evidence of left ventricular dysfunction or valvular pathology (The presence of a vegetation or new valvular regurgitation by echocardiography are major criteria for diagnosing infective endocarditis.). Results of arterial blood gases included pH 7.25, partial pressure of oxygen 54 mm Hg (Normal: 80-100 mm Hg), and partial pressure of carbon dioxide 44 mm Hg (Normal: 35-45 mmHg) while breathing 70% inspired oxygen by face mask. Cultures and sputum samples drawn. Chest radiography showed dense bilateral alveolar infiltrates (The radiograph reveals prominent involvement of the lungs. Examples of infections that can progress rapidly include primary influenza pneumonia and Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia.).
The patient's respiratory status declined, and he required intubation. Prednisone (40 milligrams) and broad spectrum antibiotics, including doxycycline, ceftriaxone, and trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole, were administered. The patient was admitted to the intensive case unit of the outside hospital and gatifloxacin and rifampin were added. He was then transferred to a tertiary care hospital.
Past Medical History
The patient had previously been in good health (Previously damaged lungs can harbor a different set of organisms than healthy lungs. Similarly, previous co-morbidities such as diabetes mellitus may predispose a patient to develop certain infections.).
Medications
None (Some medications can influence the diagnosis, including those that suppress the immune system, such as corticosteroids.).
Epidemiological History
The patient lived in an urban area. He was employed in the scientific sector, and his laboratory space had recently been moved to a temporary structure (A patient's living situation, and type and setting of work are important factors to be considered in determining one's potential exposure to infectious diseases.). He did not work with biological agents (Exposure to biological agents can predispose one to specific organisms, possibly including bioterrorism agents.). Two weeks earlier, he had traveled to the Midwestern United States. He smoked cigarettes, occasionally drank alcohol and denied illicit drug use (Cigarette smokers, illicit drug users and people who consume excessive alcohol are at risk of developing certain infections. For example, intravenous drug users are at higher risk for developing right-sided heart valve infective endocarditis.). He owned a dog and had no other recent exposures to animals (Exposure to animals influences the differential diagnosis, such as the possibility of Cat scratch disease in people who own cats. Similarly, a history of insect or animal bites is important.). A friend had recently returned from Asia with pneumonia (Exposure to someone with a similar illness should be considered, as a significant number of infections are contagious.).
Physical Examination
On examination (See the annotation above for normal ranges for the vital signs.) at the tertiary care hospital, the temperature was 99.1°F (37.3°C), pulse 98-120 beats per minute, blood pressure 73-104/41-63 mm Hg, respiratory rate 20-24 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation 90% on 100% inspired oxygen. The patient was intubated, sedated, and paralyzed. He appeared his stated age and well-nourished (Malnourishment increases the risk of acquiring certain infections by suppressing immunity.). There were coarse breath sounds present bilaterally; the remainder of the examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 10,800 cells/mm³ (reference range 4500-11,000); (differential of 77% neutrophils, 12% bands, 7% lymphocytes and 3% monocytes), hematocrit 41.2% and hemoglobin 14.7 grams/dL. The level of alanine aminotransferase (Of note, the levels of ALT and AST are elevated and the albumin level is low. Abnormal liver function tests can be seen in infections, including those not specifically targeting the liver, such as Legionnaires’ disease.) was 93 U/L (reference range 10-55), aspartate aminotransferase 109 U/L (reference range 10-40) and albumin 2.4 grams/dL (reference range 3.3-5.0); other routine laboratory tests were normal.
A chest radiograph showed diffuse dense infiltrates bilaterally.
Figure 1. Chest radiograph
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
A sputum specimen (Obtaining a sputum specimen for gram stain may elucidate the cause of illness early in the course and is a relatively inexpensive test.) was obtained and cultured. A gram stain of the sputum is shown in Figure 2, and gram stain of the culture plate is shown in Figure 3 below.
Figure 2. Gram stain of sputum sample.
Figure 3. Gram stain of culture growth from a sputum specimen.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
The urine was positive for Legionella pneumophila antigen (Some pathogens such as Legionella can be difficult or slow to grow in culture, and may require specialized growth media. For Legionella and Streptococcus pneumoniae, diagnosis can often be made more rapidly by checking a urine sample for the presence of pathogen-specific cell-surface antigens.), serogroup 1. The primary sputum gram stain showed a few polymorphonuclear leukocytes but no organisms. The sputum was then cultured on several types of media including a buffered charcoal yeast extract (CYE) plate, which grew Legionella pneumophila, serogroup 1. (See Figure 4.) PCR testing for Mycoplasma, an examination for Pneumocystis and fungal culture were negative. Testing for HIV infection was negative.
Treatment and Followup
Azithromycin (Many antibiotics that show effective in vitro killing of Legionella are clinically ineffective, in part due to Legionella's growth within intracellular endosomes, where most antibiotics do not reach levels sufficient to be effective. Azithromycin is notable for excellent uptake into cells, making it useful for intracellular pathogens such as Legionella.) was administered daily for 21 days. The patient gradually improved and was discharged.
Figure 4. Detail of Figure 3.
Discussion
This patient had Legionnaires’ disease, an acute consolidating pneumonia. There is usually a prodrome of fever and generalized malaise, often with gastrointestinal complaints including nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. This can delay diagnosis in the early phase, as illustrated by this patient. Legionnaires’ disease is caused by Legionella pneumophila, a gram negative bacillus with fastidious growth requirements. While there are at least 16 different serogroups, L. pneumophila, serogroup 1, causes 70-90% of human infections and is the only serotype identified by the urinary antigen test. Legionella pneumonia is initiated by aerosolization, generally by an infected water source. It is often indistinguishable from other causes of acute community acquired pneumonia, particularly pneumococcal pneumonia; however, Legionella tends to cause multi-lobar, diffuse consolidation and there may be significant gastrointestinal symptoms with abnormalities of the liver function tests.
In any previously healthy person with an acute serious pulmonary process, other considerations, including emerging infections such as SARS and community-acquired necrotizing MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus) pneumonia, agents of bioterrorism, such as plague and tularemia, and an undiagnosed immunodeficiency, such as HIV infection or malignancy, with an opportunistic infection must be considered.
Final Diagnosis
Legionella pneumophila, serogroup 1, pneumonia.
References
(2011). Legionellosis --- United States, 2000-2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 60, 1083-1086.
PMID:21849965(PubMed abstract) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2011) Legionellosis --- United States, 2000-2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 60(32):1083-6.
PMID:21849965(PubMed abstract) O'Loughlin, R.E., Kightlinger, L., Werpy, M.C., Brown, E., Stevens, V., Hepper, C., Keane, T., Benson, R.F., Fields, B.S., and Moore, M.R. (2007). Restaurant outbreak of Legionnaires' disease associated with a decorative fountain: an environmental and case-control study. BMC Infect Dis 7, 93.
PMID:17688692(PubMed abstract) Neil and Berkelman. (2008)Increasing incidence of legionellosis in the United States, 1990-2005: changing epidemiologic trends. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Sep 1;47(5):591-9.
PMID:18665818(PubMed abstract)
(2011). Legionellosis --- United States, 2000-2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 60, 1083-1086.
PMID:21849965(PubMed abstract)
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2011) Legionellosis --- United States, 2000-2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 60(32):1083-6.
PMID:21849965(PubMed abstract)
O'Loughlin, R.E., Kightlinger, L., Werpy, M.C., Brown, E., Stevens, V., Hepper, C., Keane, T., Benson, R.F., Fields, B.S., and Moore, M.R. (2007). Restaurant outbreak of Legionnaires' disease associated with a decorative fountain: an environmental and case-control study. BMC Infect Dis 7, 93.
PMID:17688692(PubMed abstract)
Neil and Berkelman. (2008)Increasing incidence of legionellosis in the United States, 1990-2005: changing epidemiologic trends. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Sep 1;47(5):591-9.
PMID:18665818(PubMed abstract)
