History of Present Illness
2015 January February Featured Case: A man in his thirties was admitted 4 months after deceased donor kidney transplantation because of diarrhea and fever, and he was found to have an elevated serum creatinine level of 3 mg/dL (baseline was 1.6-1.8 mg/dL). Cultures of the blood and urine were negative. A course of corticosteroids was administered; a renal biopsy at that time showed no evidence of rejection. The following month, he was admitted for fevers. The serum creatinine had increased to 6 mg/dL. He was treated for a urinary tract infection with levofloxacin.
During the next month, the creatinine level continued to rise, and night sweats and chills occurred. The patient was admitted to the hospital because of a low grade fever and increasing serum creatinine level.
Past Medical History
The patient had chronic kidney disease secondary to hypertensive nephropathy and underwent a deceased donor transplant one decade earlier, which eventually failed. Six months before this admission, a second deceased donor renal transplant was performed (donor and recipient both cytomegalovirus positive). The donor of the second transplanted kidney was thought to have neurocysticercosis, based on calcified lesions of the brain, and the recipient received an empiric 7-day course of albendazole as part of his post-operative management. He also had a history of gout.
Medications
Medications were mycophenolate (750mg twice a day), prednisone (5 mg once daily), and sirolimus (3mg once daily).
Social History
He lived with his wife and children in California, and worked in a service industry.
Epidemiological History
He was born in Thailand. He traveled to the Central Valley in California about once a month, and had not traveled outside the country recently. He ate cooked pork and chicken, and did not consume raw foods. He did not smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol or use illicit drugs.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared well and was in no acute distress. The blood pressure was 130/80mm Hg, pulse 90 beats per minute, temperature 101.2°F (38.4°C). The oxygen saturation was 99% on room air. The abdomen was soft with fullness of the right lower quadrant at the site of the transplanted kidney. There was mild tenderness to palpation in the right lower quadrant, with a well-healed surgical scar, 1+ pitting edema of the feet and a palpable thrill of his left upper extremity at the site of an arteriovenous fistula.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 6,400 cells per cubic millimeter (reference range (ref) 4,500-11,000), with 79% neutrophils, 8% lymphocytes and 2% eosinophils. The hemoglobin was 7.7 g/dL (ref 14-18), hematocrit 23.3% (ref 40-52), albumin 2.5 g/dL (ref 3.4-4.8); other tests of liver function were normal. The level of creatinine was 17.72 mg/dl.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Results of blood and urine cultures were negative. A renal ultrasound showed no fluid collections in the region of the graft. Hemodialysis was resumed via his arteriovenous fistula.
A biopsy of the kidney was performed; pathological examination of the biopsy with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stain is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Renal biopsy specimen (HE stain).
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
A renal biopsy showed interstitial inflammation with minimal (5%) tubulointerstitial atrophy and fibrosis, neutrophilic abscesses and eosinophils, without evidence of rejection. Intracellular organisms consistent with microsporidia, Encephalitazoon species, were identified. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the specimen (Figures 1 and 2) revealed microsporidium spores within the renal tubule. Transmission electron micrography demonstrated a microsporidian spore from the renal biopsy, surrounded by exospores and an endospore with two rows of polar tubule coils seen in cross-section (Figure 3). Figure 4 shows the polar filament of a microsporidian spore by transmission electron micrograph.
Figure 2. Renal biopsy specimen (HE stain) with spores within renal tubule (arrows).
Figure 3. Transmission electron micrograph of a microsporidian spore from renal biopsy.
Figure 4. Transmission electron micrograph of a microsporidian spore showing the polar filament (arrow).
Treatment and Followup
Albendazole (400mg orally twice a day) was administered for treatment of microsporidiosis, and his immunosuppresion was reduced (prednisone dose continued, mycophenolate decreased to 500mg twice daily and sirolimus stopped). To rule out disseminated microsporidiosis, a chest radiograph and a microsporidial stain of the stool were obtained, which were both negative. The patient continued with hemodialysis for a very brief time and then stopped going to his hemodialysis sessions. His urine output increased and four months after starting albendazole, his renal function improved to a creatinine of 3mg/dL.
After three months of treatment, pathological examination of a renal biopsy continued to show microscopic foci of residual microsporidian species. Therefore, albendazole was continued. Of note, the recipient of the other deceased donor kidney was not found to have microsporidiosis.
Discussion
Microsporidia is a term that is used to describe more than 1200 species of obligate intracellular parasites that are ubiquitous in the environment. These organisms exist in spore form and have a unique polar tubule which is coiled inside the spore. There are at least fifteen microsporidian species that have been identified as human pathogens with Enterocytozoon bieneusi and three Encephalitozoon species (E. cuniculi, E. hellem and E. intestinalis) being the most common. Most human microsporidiosis cases are seen in AIDS patients and cause diarrhea, although ocular, pulmonary and genitourinary infections are also common.
In renal transplant patients who present with persistent renal failure, the differential diagnosis includes allograft rejection in addition to viral etiologies such as polyoma virus (i.e. BK virus), adenovirus and cytomegalovirus. However, infection from microsporidiosis should be considered if the patient is not responding to traditional therapies and the renal biopsy shows no evidence of rejection. Failure to diagnose this specific infection can lead to loss of the renal allograft. The frequency of microsporidiosis in renal transplants patient is unknown but can present similarly to acute rejection of the allograft. Patients can also present with intermittent fevers. Infection can occur either through transplant-transmitted microsporidiosis or through acquired transmission by the transplant recipient via ingestion or inhalation of spores. The symptoms of infection vary depending on the species, site of infection and immune status of the infected host. The most common clinical manifestation is localized disease in the gastrointestinal tract, causing diarrhea and malabsorption.
Diagnosis can be difficult but can be obtained by looking at stool, urine, and sputum samples. The urine can be evaluated for spores as patients will have intermittent shedding of the organism. Renal infection causes acute kidney injury due to spores that are shed into the lumina of the renal tubules. In the case of this patient, tissue from the transplanted kidney was obtained and showed findings of microabscesses, eosinophils and chronic interstitial nephritis. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is the gold standard for diagnosis (given the small size of the spores) and will demonstrate rows of polar tubules coils.
Treatment of microsporidiosis of a renal allograft consists of a combination of reducing immunosuppression and antimicrobial therapy. Determining the species of microsporidiosis is important for treatment of the infection. Albendazole is the drug of choice for infections caused by Encephalitozoon species but is ineffective for infections caused by Enterocytozoon bieneusi. The appropriate duration of therapy in transplant patients is unknown but often long-term therapy is required for microbiological cure.
Final Diagnosis
Microsporidiosis of the kidney in a renal transplant patient.
References
Hocevar SN, Paddock CD, Spak CW, Rosenblatt R, Diaz-Luna H, Castillo I, Luna S, Friedman GC, Antony S, Stoddard RA, Tiller RV, Peterson T, Blau DM, Sriram RR, da Silva A, de Almeida M, Benedict T, Goldsmith CS, Zaki SR, Visvesvara GS, Kuehnert MJ. (2014) Microsporidiosis acquired through solid organ transplantation: a public health investigation. Ann Intern Med. 2014 Feb 18;160(4).
PMID:24727839(PubMed abstract) Nagpal A, Pritt BS, Lorenz EC, Amer H, Nasr SH, Cornell LD, Iqbal S, Wilhelm MP. (2013) Disseminated microsporidiosis in a renal transplant recipient: case report and review of the literature. Transpl Infect Dis. 2013 Oct;15(5):526-32. Epub 2013 Aug 15.
PMID:23947513(PubMed abstract)
Hocevar SN, Paddock CD, Spak CW, Rosenblatt R, Diaz-Luna H, Castillo I, Luna S, Friedman GC, Antony S, Stoddard RA, Tiller RV, Peterson T, Blau DM, Sriram RR, da Silva A, de Almeida M, Benedict T, Goldsmith CS, Zaki SR, Visvesvara GS, Kuehnert MJ. (2014) Microsporidiosis acquired through solid organ transplantation: a public health investigation. Ann Intern Med. 2014 Feb 18;160(4).
PMID:24727839(PubMed abstract)
Nagpal A, Pritt BS, Lorenz EC, Amer H, Nasr SH, Cornell LD, Iqbal S, Wilhelm MP. (2013) Disseminated microsporidiosis in a renal transplant recipient: case report and review of the literature. Transpl Infect Dis. 2013 Oct;15(5):526-32. Epub 2013 Aug 15.
PMID:23947513(PubMed abstract)
