History of Present Illness
2012 IDWeek Case presentation: A man with HIV infection and AIDS, and increasing dyspnea.
A man in his twenties with a history of HIV infection and AIDS was admitted to a hospital with a 1-month history of increasing dyspnea. A chest radiograph reportedly showed bilateral pneumonia. Azithromycin and ceftriaxone were administered intravenously, however, his symptoms worsened. Five days later, a repeat chest radiograph revealed bilateral pneumothoraces. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, performed with intravenous contrast, revealed large bilateral hydropneumothoraces with multifocal cystic spaces and diffuse infiltrates. Chest tubes were placed bilaterally, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) and prednisone were administered empirically for treatment of Pneumocystis pneumonia. Large air leaks were noted from each of the chest tubes, and the pneumothoraces persisted. No organisms were isolated despite multiple sputum cultures.
Thirteen days after presentation, he was transferred to a tertiary care facility for further evaluation and management. Upon transfer, treatment for Pneumocystis and bacterial pneumonia were continued. Symptoms upon transfer included cough, shortness of breath, and tachycardia.
Past Medical History
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection had been diagnosed 3 years before admission. Approximately 6 weeks before admission, the absolute CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count was 15 cells per cubic millimeter and the level of HIV nucleic acid (viral load) was 364,639 copies per milliliter (mL). Emtricitabine-tenofovir in combination and ritonavir-boosted atazanavir were begun three weeks before this admission. Outpatient adherence to antiretroviral medications was uncertain.
A diagnosis of Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia with associated pneumothorax was made approximately 7 months before admission. He also had a history of genital herpes simplex infection.
Medications
His prescribed outpatient medications included emtricitabine-tenofovir in combination (200/300mg daily), ritonavir (100mg daily), atazanavir (300mg daily), azithromycin (1200mg weekly) and trimethoprim(TMP)-sulfamethoxazole(SMX) (double-strength, daily), but his adherence was not confirmed. On transfer, his medications included emtricitabine-tenofovir in combination, ritonavir, atazanavir, prednisone (40 mg twice daily, orally), TMP-SMX (320 mg based on TMP dose, every 8 hours, intravenously), ceftriaxone (2 gm every 24 hours, intravenously) and azithromycin (500 mg every 24 hours, intravenously).
Allergies
He had no allergies.
Family History
Social History
The patient had been incarcerated.
Epidemiological History
He smoked two packs daily for six years until three weeks before this presentation. He reported no alcohol or illicit drug use.
Physical Examination
On initial evaluation the patient was in minimal distress. The blood pressure was 127/110 mm Hg, pulse 108 to 139 beats per minute, temperature 98.1°F (36.7°C), respirations 18 to 30 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 96-100% while breathing two liters supplemental oxygen through nasal cannula. The breath sounds were decreased bilaterally, and bilateral chest tubes were in place, with evidence of air leaks. The remainder of the physical examination was normal.
Studies
On the day of admission, after approximately 3 weeks of antiretroviral therapy, the absolute CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count was 23 cells per cubic millimeter and the level of HIV nucleic acid was 4729 copies per mL. A chest radiograph performed on admission is shown (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Chest radiograph on admission.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit in the tertiary care hospital. Five days after admission, bronchoscopy was performed, with balloon occlusion of identifiable air leaks and placement of endobronchial valves. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid was not sent for Pneumocystis jiroveci testing. Empiric therapy for Pneumocystis pneumonia was continued and the patient was transferred to the medical floor one week later.
The patient completed three weeks of empiric trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) and a prednisone taper for Pneumocystis pneumonia. He remained clinically stable, but air leaks persisted from chest tubes despite endobronchial valve placement. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, performed with intravenous contrast one month after admission to the tertiary care hospital revealed interval worsening of bilateral hydropneumothoraces, with diffuse infiltrates and fluid levels suggestive of infection or inflammation (Figures 2 and 3) when compared to CT imaging done prior to transfer.
Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) with lung biopsy was performed on the right lung and demonstrated severe bullous disease in the upper lung lobe with two chronic fistula tracts into the upper lobe from chest tubes, and minor bullae in the middle and lower lobes. A right upper lobectomy was performed and lung tissue sent for pathology (Figure 4, hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stain).
Four days later, VATS procedure was performed on the left lung, with wedge resection of the left upper lobe and mechanical pleurodesis.
Figure 2. CT of the chest. Arrows indicate chest tube placement.
Figure 3. CT of the chest.
Figure 4. H and E stain of lung tissue, 200x magnification.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Pathological examination of lung tissue obtained by VATS (Figures 3, 4 and 5) demonstrated chronic pneumonitis with abundant viral cytopathic changes morphologically consistent with infection. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining (Figures 4 and 5) of the tissue revealed enlarged cells (cytomegaly), with large intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions and a surrounding halo. Pathological examination with cytomegalovirus (CMV) immunoperoxidase stain (Figure 6) stained enlarged nuclei. There was no evidence of dysplasia or malignancy.
Special stains for fungi, acid fast bacilli and Warthin-Starry stain were negative. Testing for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency was negative.
Figure 5. H and E stain of lung tissue, 400x magnification.
Figure 6. CMV immunoperoxidase stain of lung tissue, 400x magnification.
Treatment and Followup
Ganciclovir was administered intravenously, with clinical improvement during the following three weeks.
Discussion
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) pneumonitis in HIV-infected patients is exceptionally rare. Although CMV is sometimes cultured from bronchoalveolar fluid in AIDS patients, it is rarely a cause of actual disease. Criteria for establishing diagnosis of CMV pneumonitis includes finding pulmonary infiltrates on a chest radiograph, presence of characteristic intracellular inclusions in lung tissue or bronchoalveolar macrophages, and absence of other pulmonary pathogens based on microbiologic studies or absence of response to empiric therapy [Rodriguez-Barradas et al. 1996]. A definitive diagnosis requires correlation of clinical findings with biopsy results demonstrating viral inclusions.
Pneumothorax in HIV patients is most commonly caused by Pneumocystis jiroveci. There are no reported cases of CMV pneumonitis with pneumothorax; a recent case report documented CMV pneumonitis causing pneumomediastinum [Katsidzira et al 2011]. Other possible causes of pneumothorax in AIDS patients include underlying lung diseases such as bullous emphysema, bacterial pneumonia with pneumatocele, and secondary pneumothorax. Except for tobacco abuse, there were no identifiable causes of bullous lung disease in our patient. Testing for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency was negative.
Pneumonia in a patient with AIDS warrants diagnostic testing for specific opportunistic pathogens. CMV pneumonitis, though rare in HIV/AIDS patients, should be considered in the differential diagnosis in patients with an absolute CD4 T-lymphocyte cell count of less than 100 cells per cubic millimeter. Early diagnosis and treatment may be life-saving for the patient.
Final Diagnosis
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) pneumonitis in a patient with HIV infection and AIDS.
References
Katsidzira, L., Fana, G.T., Makunike-Mutasa, R., and Ferrand, R.A. (2011). Pneumomediastinum in an HIV-infected patient with cytomegalovirus pneumonitis. Int J STD AIDS 22, 179-180.
PMID:21464459(PubMed abstract) Rodriguez-Barradas, M.C., Stool, E., Musher, D.M., Gathe, J., Jr., Goldstein, J., Genta, R.M., and Yoffe, B. (1996). Diagnosing and treating cytomegalovirus pneumonia in patients with AIDS. Clin Infect Dis 23, 76-81.
PMID:8816133(PubMed abstract)
Katsidzira, L., Fana, G.T., Makunike-Mutasa, R., and Ferrand, R.A. (2011). Pneumomediastinum in an HIV-infected patient with cytomegalovirus pneumonitis. Int J STD AIDS 22, 179-180.
PMID:21464459(PubMed abstract)
Rodriguez-Barradas, M.C., Stool, E., Musher, D.M., Gathe, J., Jr., Goldstein, J., Genta, R.M., and Yoffe, B. (1996). Diagnosing and treating cytomegalovirus pneumonia in patients with AIDS. Clin Infect Dis 23, 76-81.
PMID:8816133(PubMed abstract)
