History of Present Illness
Summary: A child with vomiting and a skin rash.
A 3-year-old boy presented with abdominal pain, vomiting, lethargy and skin rash. The patient was in good health until nine days before admission. He developed vomiting and lethargy, which resolved spontaneously after three days. Five days before admission, he again became lethargic, appeared glassy-eyed, and was admitted to an outside hospital. Intravenous fluids and supportive care were administered for two days for a presumed diagnosis of gastroenteritis. At the time of his discharge, his family noted bilateral foot swelling with pain on ambulation.
One day before this admission, a rash on his lower extremities was noted. During the night, the patient began complaining of abdominal pain and started vomiting brown material. His rash was noted to have spread to his arms. He was admitted to the hospital.
Past Medical History
Six weeks before this admission, he had had Streptococcal pharyngitis and had received a course of amoxicillin.
Allergies
The patient had multiple food allergies (including corn, wheat, rice, milk, eggs and soy) that led to vomiting. He also had multiple environmental allergies for which he took an antihistamine.
Family History
There was no family history of blood dyscrasias or malignancies.
Social History
He lived with his parents.
Epidemiological History
He had no siblings or pets, and there had been no day care exposures. A grandparent had been ill with an upper respiratory infection.
Physical Examination
The patient was a lethargic, minimally interactive young boy in mild distress. He was afebrile but tachycardic with otherwise normal vital signs. His eyes were glassy with clear conjunctivae. He would not open his mouth for examination. His neck was supple without lymphadenopathy or meningismus. The lungs were clear to auscultation, and the cardiac examination did not reveal any murmurs. The abdomen was mildly tender diffusely without rebound or guarding. The liver edge was palpable and nontender. The feet and ankles were diffusely swollen and mildly tender to passive range of motion. There was a left-sided greater than right-sided non-blanching pinpoint rash on the top of his feet, legs, buttocks, and in his left antecubital fossa. (See Figures 1 and 2.) The rash spared the trunk. His stool was guaiac positive.
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Figure 2. Physical findings.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 13,400/mm³ with 57% polymorphonuclear cells, 17% bands, and 19% lymphocytes. Coagulation studies, renal function and liver function tests were normal. The urinalysis had no protein or blood.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Blood and urine cultures were negative. A rectal swab for enterovirus and a respiratory viral panel were negative. A test for anti-DNase B was negative. A skin biopsy of his petechial lesions was performed and revealed a leukocytoclastic vasculitis with immunoglobulin (Ig) A immunofluorescent staining consistent with Henoch-Schonlein purpura.
Treatment and Followup
Ceftriaxone was administered for the first 72 hours until blood cultures were negative. He was monitored for renal involvement of vasculitis but there was none. He was managed conservatively with hydration and anti-inflammatory medications and recovered fully.
Discussion
Henoch-Schonlein Purpura is a multi-organ vasculitis involving skin, gastrointestinal tract, kidney and joints. It typically affects children ages 4 to 7 with a male predominance, but adult cases have also been reported. Although the etiology remains unknown, a preceding upper respiratory illness or vaccination has been reported in some cases.
This is an immune-mediated disease whose hallmark is immunoglobulin (Ig) A staining in the vascular walls of effected organs and elevated IgA serum levels. Clinical manifestations may occur all at once or in stages. Characteristic features include a maculopapular and then purpuric rash in dependent areas, as was the case here, as well as arthralgias and non-pitting edema of the extremities. Gastrointestinal involvement may manifest as colicky abdominal pain with or without guaiac positive stools or gross bleeding. Renal involvement with microscopic hematuria, nephritic or nephrotic syndrome is the dreaded complication occurring in 20-60% cases because it can have long term sequelae in an illness for which there is otherwise an excellent prognosis.
In this case, the absence of fever, evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), or positive blood cultures, as well as the negative serologic studies, made a vasculitis the leading diagnosis. This was confirmed by the typical biopsy appearance.
Final Diagnosis
Henoch-Schonlein Purpura.
References
Saulsbury, F.T. (1999). Henoch-Schonlein purpura in children. Report of 100 patients and review of the literature. Medicine (Baltimore) 78, 395-409.
PMID:10575422(PubMed abstract) Saulsbury, F.T. (2010). Henoch-Schonlein purpura. Curr Opin Rheumatol 22, 598-602.
PMID:20473173(PubMed abstract)
Saulsbury, F.T. (1999). Henoch-Schonlein purpura in children. Report of 100 patients and review of the literature. Medicine (Baltimore) 78, 395-409.
PMID:10575422(PubMed abstract)
Saulsbury, F.T. (2010). Henoch-Schonlein purpura. Curr Opin Rheumatol 22, 598-602.
PMID:20473173(PubMed abstract)
