History of Present Illness
Medical Student Curriculum Case Summary: A man with fever and rash after chemotherapy.
A man in his forties, who was receiving chemotherapy for recurrent lung cancer, presented with one week of nausea, vomiting, profuse diarrhea and fever to 102°F (38.9°). He also noted a transient left arm rash. On presentation to the clinic, he noted new skin rashes on his lower extremity and abdomen.
Past Medical History
There was a history of recurrent stage IV adenocarcinoma of the lung.
Medications
The patient was receiving his third cycle of vinorelbine tartrate.
Epidemiological History
He was living in New England, and had previously lived in Japan and Vietnam during the 1960's. There was a smoking history of 40 pack years, and no recent animal or travel exposure.
Physical Examination
There was a serpiginous rash on his right thigh and multiple urticarial lesions on his lower back, abdomen (Figure 1), and thigh.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Studies
At the time of his clinic visit, the white blood cell count was 5400 cells/mm³ with a normal differential. Four weeks earlier, the white cell count had been 9400 cells/mm³, with 14% eosinophils.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Stool examination revealed Strongyloides stercoralis (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Examination of stool.
Treatment and Followup
The patient had disseminated strongyloidiasis with gastrointestinal manifestations precipitated by chemotherapy, but with no clinical manifestations of hyperinfection syndrome. He was treated with ivermectin.
Discussion
The presumed exposure was thought to have occurred during the patient's travel to Southeast Asia. Of the organisms in the differential, only Strongyloides can maintain a subclinical auto-infection over thirty years. Thus onchocerciasis and gnathostomiasis are unlikely. Swimmer's itch is due to avian cercariasis, typically causing a pruritic rash over the lower extremities and associated with wading in fresh water.
Cutaneous manifestations of chronic strongyloidiasis include urticarial rash and dermatitis due to migration of filariform larvae (larva currens or creeping eruption), as seen in this patient. Immune complex mediated polyarthritis can also be a feature of chronic strongyloidiasis.
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated Strongyloides stercoralis.
References
