History of Present Illness
Summary: A middle-aged man with AML, fevers and a skin eruption.
A middle-aged man with a history of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) and status post an allogeneic bone marrow transplant (BMT), presented with fevers and a skin eruption, which progressed to confluent blisters and necrosis.
Past Medical History
As above, there was a history of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) and bone marrow transplantation.
Medications
The patient had recently received vancomycin and meropenem.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared uncomfortable, with temperatures to 101°F (38.3°C). There was a diffuse blistering skin eruption, which involved the mucous membranes of his mouth and genital region, and conjunctival injection was present. Figure 1. Physical finding. Figure 2. Physical finding.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Figure 2. Physical finding.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient’s skin lesions progressed to involve approximately 80% of his body surface area (Figures 1 and 2).
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Skin biopsy revealed full thickness epidermal necrosis and subepidermal vesicle formation consistent with toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN).
Treatment and Followup
The patient received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) and was treated supportively with aggressive local skin care and intravenous fluids. Unfortunately, he expired due to sepsis.
Discussion
Erythema multiforme typically presents with target-like macular skin lesions without mucosal involvement. Pemphigus vulgaris is predominantly a bullous skin disorder. The presence of mucosal lesions argues against staphylococcal skin syndrome. A biopsy is the only way to exclude an IgA-associated vancomycin reaction.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is characterized by full thickness epidermal necrosis and is considered part of the spectrum of Stevens-Johnson Syndrome. Cases with involvement of >30% of the body surface area are labeled as TEN, and mortality rates can be higher than 40%. The majority of cases of TEN are drug-induced. Treatment is largely supportive, although small case series have suggested that IVIg may be beneficial in shortening the duration of symptoms.
Final Diagnosis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN).
References
Gerull, R., Nelle, M., and Schaible, T. (2011). Toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson syndrome: a review. Crit Care Med 39, 1521-1532.
PMID:21358399(PubMed abstract)
