History of Present Illness
Summary: A teenager with pneumonia.
A girl in her mid-teens developed a cough five days before admission. She was seen by her primary provider as an outpatient and sent home.
One day before admission, fever, vomiting, fatigue, and increased productive cough occurred. She was seen at a community hospital; on examination, the respiratory rate was 40-60 breaths per minute, temperature 104.5°F (40.3°C), and a chest radiograph revealed bilateral pulmonary infiltrates consistent with pneumonia. She was treated with ceftriaxone and azithromycin.
Her medical condition rapidly deteriorated, however, and she developed increasing respiratory distress, tachypnea, hypotension to 70/50 mm Hg and decreasing oxygen saturation. She was intubated, treated with intravenous fluids and dopamine, and transferred to a tertiary care facility.
Past Medical History
There was a history of mild asthma, recent extremity fracture in an accident, occasional headaches, and a history of smoking 2 packs per day.
Medications
She had taken acetaminophen as needed for headaches. At the community hospital, ceftriaxone, azithromycin and dopamine were initiated.
Physical Examination
The temperature was 100.6°F (38.1°C), pulse 123 beats/minute, respirations 20 per minute (intubated), and blood pressure 91/39 mm/Hg. Coarse breath sounds were heard.
Studies
The hematocrit was 31.3%, hemoglobin 10.9 g/dL, white blood cell count 2,200 cells/mm³ (44% neutrophils, 13% bands, and 29% lymphocytes), platelets 98,000/mm³; sodium 133 mmol/L, potassium 3.0 mmol/L, chloride 112 mmol/L, carbon dioxide 21.5 mmol/L, glucose 112 mg/dL, urea nitrogen 9 mg/dL, and creatinine 0.6 mg/dL.
A chest radiograph revealed pneumonia ( Figure 1 ).
Figure 1. Chest radiograph.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest was performed later in her course and revealed extensive pneumatoceles, abscesses and loculated hydropneumothoraces ( Figures 2 and 3 ).
Figure 2. Chest CT scan.
Figure 3. Chest CT scan.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Staphylococcus aureus was present on gram stain and grew from her sputum. It was sensitive to methicillin.
Treatment and Followup
The patient's course was complicated by septic shock, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and the development of pneumatoceles and hydropneumothorax. She required a right thoracotomy with pulmonary debridement and decortication, chest tube placement, tracheostomy and gastrostomy tube placement. She gradually improved.
Discussion
Staphylococcal pneumonia is a virulent, rapidly progressive, necrotizing pneumonia. It typically occurs in the elderly on the heels of a respiratory viral infection, such as influenza. Due to the necrosis, multiple mechanical complications are common, as seen in this case. Legionella , RSV, and EBV do not cause necrosis. Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii ) pneumonia (PCP) would be an important consideration if this patient were immunosuppressed, such as with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or corticosteroid use.
Final Diagnosis
Severe necrotizing pneumonia due to methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA).
References
Kallen, A.J., Brunkard, J., Moore, Z., Budge, P., Arnold, K.E., Fosheim, G., Finelli, L., Beekmann, S.E., Polgreen, P.M., Gorwitz, R., and Hageman, J. (2009). Staphylococcus aureus community-acquired pneumonia during the 2006 to 2007 influenza season. Ann Emerg Med 53, 358-365.
PMID:18534715 ( PubMed abstract )
Kreienbuehl, L., Charbonney, E., and Eggimann, P. (2011). Community-acquired necrotizing pneumonia due to methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus secreting Panton-Valentine leukocidin: a review of case reports. Ann Intensive Care 1, 52.
PMID:22192614 ( PubMed abstract )
Mongkolrattanothai, K., Aldag, J.C., Mankin, P., and Gray, B.M. (2009). Epidemiology of community-onset Staphylococcus aureus infections in pediatric patients: an experience at a Children's Hospital in central Illinois. BMC Infect Dis 9, 112.
PMID:19607683 ( PubMed abstract )
