History of Present Illness
Summary: A woman with a non-healing wound, fever, and knee pain.
A woman in her sixties underwent right mastectomy for breast cancer, complicated by non-healing of the wound with chronic discharge. She presented with two days of fever and one day of acute left knee pain.
Past Medical History
There was a history of rheumatoid arthritis and a seizure disorder.
Epidemiological History
She had traveled in the previous month to Florida, and had no animal exposures.
Physical Examination
She was an obese woman with a temperature of 99°F (37.2°C), blood pressure 70/30 mm Hg, pulse 90 beats/minute, and respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute. The skin was erythematous over the right chest wall, with no drainage from the wound (Figures 1 and 2). There was no adenopathy. The neck was supple, without jugular venous distention, and she had a clear chest. Cardiac examination revealed a I/VI systolic murmur at the left sternal border, without rub or gallop. The abdomen was obese, soft and nontender, without hepatosplenomegaly or masses. The left knee was swollen and tender, with a decreased range of motion to 60 degrees.
Figure 1. Physical finding.
Figure 2. Physical finding.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 13,000 cells/mm³ (with 35% band forms) and the platelet count 112,000/mm³. There was a mild transaminitis, and the prothrombin time was 14.0 seconds; the plasma level of creatinine was elevated at 3.6 mg/dL.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient had persistent hypotension for which pressors were required.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
All blood culture bottles, knee aspirate cultures, and a swab from open area of wound were grew Group G Streptococcus.
Treatment and Followup
The hypotension, liver function abnormalities, and renal dysfunction normalized after forty-eight hours with supportive therapy and antibiotics. She was treated for six weeks with penicillin G, and improved.
Discussion
Group G Streptococcus colonizes the skin, nasopharynx and genital tract, and can cause skin and soft tissue infection, septic arthritis and bacteremia. The rate of underlying malignancy is high (20-65%) in series of patients with serious group G streptococcal infection. Toxic shock syndrome may occur after Group G streptococcal infection, although this organism is not known to secrete any exotoxin.
Final Diagnosis
Group G streptococcal cellulitis and septic arthritis, with toxic shock syndrome.
References
Ekelund, K., Skinhoj, P., Madsen, J., and Konradsen, H.B. (2005). Invasive group A, B, C and G streptococcal infections in Denmark 1999-2002: epidemiological and clinical aspects. Clin Microbiol Infect 11, 569-576.
PMID:15966976(PubMed abstract)
