History of Present Illness
A renal transplant recipient in his twenties, on chronic immunosuppressive therapy, presented in winter with fever, sore throat, nasal discharge and pleuritic chest pain for 3 days. He received his renal transplant five years prior to presentation. He denied cough, dyspnea or any other symptom. He was admitted to a hospital in Mexico City and was presumptively treated for pneumonia. Despite a complete course of oseltamivir, and 7 days of meropenem, clarithromycin and vancomycin, his fever persisted.
Past Medical History
Five years before presentation he received a cadaveric renal transplant for C-ANCA renal vasculitis. The procedure was not complicated by rejection or infectious complications.
Medications
Prednisone, mycophenolate mofetil, and tacrolimus.
Epidemiological History
The patient was a student, lived in an urban area, and he denied alcohol, tobacco or drug use. He owned a dog and 2 days prior to this admission he was bitten on his left hand by a friend's cat. His vaccination record was up-to-date.
Physical Examination
The patient appeared well. The blood pressure was 110/80 mmHg, pulse 90 beats per minute, temperature 101.8ºF (38.8ºC), respirations 23 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation 97%. The examination was otherwise normal.
Studies
The initial laboratory investigations revealed white blood cell count of 5.8 (reference range: 4-12 x 10 3 /microliter), with a normal differential; the remainder of the complete blood count was normal. The C-reactive protein was 9.22 (0-1 mg/dL). Liver function tests showed an alanine transaminase of 183 (7-52) U/L, aspartate transaminase of 369 (13-39) U/L, alkaline phosphatase 214 (34-104) U/L and gamma-glutamyltransferase of 801 (9-64) U/L. Other routine laboratory tests were normal.
A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a left upper lobe consolidation and two lung nodules that had a diameter of less than 5mm (Fig. 1); and a left supraclavicular lymph node conglomerate, axillary and mediastinal lymphadenopathy, all smaller than 1 cm in diameter (Fig. 2). Nasal swab for respiratory virus PCR was positive for Influenza A and Parainfluenza 1.
An initial Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) PCR viral load was 13,764 IU/ml (reference range: 0) and a repeat test was 6,854 IU/ml. EBV IgG was positive, IgM negative and EBV nuclear antigen (EBNA) negative. The CMV PCR viral load was undetectable. Bartonella, Coxiella burnetii, Toxoplasma, HIV, Hepatitis viral panel (acute and chronic) serologic tests were negative. Tuberculin skin test and Histoplasma urine antigen were negative.
Figure 1. CT chest at presentation revealed mild left upper lobe consolidation (arrow) and two lung nodules of less than 5mm in diameter.
Figure 2. CT chest at presentation showing a conglomerate of lymph nodes in the left supraclavicular fossa (arrow), each measuring less than 1cm.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
On admission, he was started on meropenem, clarithromycin, vancomycin, and oseltamivir. On the 4th day of hospitalization, due to persistent fever, a bronchoscopy was performed. The bronchoalveolar lavage showed no microorganisms on Gram, potassium hydroxide (KOH) and Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) stains. GeneXpert Mtb/RIF and Galactomannan index test were negative, as well as bacterial, fungal and mycobacterial cultures.
The patient remained febrile but was hemodynamically stable. On day 10 of hospitalization, he underwent a left supraclavicular lymph node biopsy. Microbiology stains (Gram, Grocott's Methenamine Silver (GMS) and ZN) on lymph node biopsy were negative.
He developed new onset dyspnea on Day 11, and his oxygen saturation decreased. A repeat chest and abdominal CT showed a new miliary lung infiltrate and progressive lung consolidation (Fig. 3), hepatosplenomegaly and abdominal lymphadenopathy.
Figure 3. CT chest on day +11 of presentation showed a new miliary infiltrate and progressive lung consolidation (arrow).
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Histopathologic examination of the supraclavicular lymph node showed necrotizing granulomatous lymphadenitis (Fig. 4). PAS, GM, Warthin-Starry and ZN stains were negative for microorganisms.
Due to his clinical progression and lack of a diagnosis, a video-assisted thoracoscopic lung biopsy was performed on day 17 of hospitalization. That same day, several hours after the surgical procedure, Histoplasma capsulatum (Fig. 5) was isolated from the lymph node biopsy. Histopathologic examination of the lung tissue showed granulomatous pneumonitis. PAS (Fig. 6) and GMS (Fig. 7) stain showed small yeast forms consistent with histoplasmosis. Histoplasma capsulatum was also later isolated from the lung tissue.
Figure 4. Left Lymph node biopsy. H&E stain (4x). Necrotizing granulomatous lymphadenitis (arrows).
Figure 5. Direct microscopy of lymph node culture. Lactophenol cotton blue stain (40x). Numerous tuberculate, thick-walled macroconidia, between 8-15 µm in size (arrowheads) and septate hyphae (arrow).
Figure 6. Left lung biopsy. Periodic Acid–Schiff (PAS) stain (40x). Small spherical budding yeast-forms suggestive of Histoplasma spp. observed in the cytoplasm of alveolar macrophage (arrow).
Figure 7. Left lung biopsy. GMS stain (40x). Numerous fungal elements suggestive of histoplasmosis, in the intracellullar alveolar macrophage (arrow).
Treatment and Followup
He was started empirically on liposomal amphotericin B on day 11 of hospitalization, and his fever resolved. He received liposomal amphotericin B for 2 weeks, and subsequently oral itraconazole, which he will receive for 12 months.
Discussion
Histoplasmosis is caused by a soil fungus that has a worldwide distribution, but there are areas of hyperendemicity, including central Mexico. Disseminated disease is the most common form of presentation in immunocompromised patients. Post-transplant histoplasmosis is uncommon with an incidence in solid organ transplant recipients of about 1%. The majority of post-transplant histoplasmosis occurs within the first 2 years following transplantation when immunosuppression is most intense, but sporadic cases continue to manifest years later. [1, 2]
Histoplasma capsulatum is a thermally dimorphic fungus with a mycelial and yeast phase. Other well-known dimorphic fungi include Blastomyces dermatitidis, Sporothrix schenkii, Coccidioides immitis, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis and Talaromyces marneffei (previously Penicillium marneffei). Microscopic evaluation of the mycelial phase reveals macroconidia and microconidia (infective form). At 37°C, H. capsulatum changes to a small uninucleate yeast (2-5 micrometers) that reproduces by multipolar budding.[3,4]
Clinical features of post-transplant histoplasmosis may be non-specific, resulting in significant delays in diagnosis (sometimes 2-3 weeks after the onset of symptoms). Severity may vary over a wide range, from an indolent disease to an aggressive septic picture. Fever is the most commonly reported symptom and histoplasmosis should be considered in patients with fever of unknown origin. Other associated symptoms include cough, dyspnea, pleuritic chest pain, diarrhea, headache, and diaphoresis, but these may be variably present. Pancytopenia may be prominent and is present in 86% of patients with disseminated disease. Radiologic findings are non-specific and include multiple pulmonary nodules, mediastinal and perihilar lymphadenopathy, cavitary lesions, diffuse infiltrates, and occasionally a miliary pattern. Computed tomography of the abdomen may reveal hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy in about half of the cases of disseminated disease.[1, 5, 6]
Biopsy of Histoplasma -infected tissue may demonstrate intracellular yeasts. Histological differential diagnoses for intracellular organisms include Cryptococcus, Candida, Leishmania, Pneumocystis jirovecii and Talaromyces marneffei. In cases of severe disseminated infection, intracellular yeast may be seen on examination of a Wright’s stained peripheral blood smear. Combining respiratory cytology and histopathology with culture can increase the diagnostic yield to about 82%. Histoplasma urine antigen test is the most sensitive assay–positive in up to 93% of patients.[1, 2] Liposomal amphotericin B constitutes first line therapy in severe histoplasmosis. Itraconazole is useful as a step down therapy, and remains the treatment of choice for patients with milder disease.[2, 5]
There is a long list of diagnostic possibilities in a transplant recipient presenting with fevers, hepatosplenomegaly and generalized lymphadenopathy. Apart from histoplasmosis, possibilities include tuberculosis, cat scratch disease, mononucleosis-like syndrome (EBV, CMV, Toxoplasma gondii), post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease, HIV infection and endemic mycosis such as coccidioidomycosis and paracoccidioidomycosis. His diagnosis was particularly challenging. Like many transplant recipients, he had had multiple infections simultaneously, and risk factors for many more.[1, 3, 4]
Final Diagnosis
Disseminated histoplasmosis
References
Gajurel K, Dhakal R, Deresinski S. Histoplasmosis in transplant recipients. Clin Transplant. 2017;31:e13087.
PMID:28805270(PubMed abstract) Assi, M., Martin, S., Wheat, L. J., Hage, C., Freifeld, A., Avery, R., Kaul, D. R. (2013). Histoplasmosis After Solid Organ Transplant. Clinical Infectious Diseases: An Official Publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, 57(11), 1542–1549.
PMID:24046304(PubMed abstract) Kauffman, C. A., & Miceli, M. H. (2015). Histoplasmosis and Blastomycosis in Solid Organ Transplant Recipients. Journal of Fungi, 1(2), 94–106.
PMID:29376901(PubMed abstract) Mandell G.L., Bennett J.E., Dolin R. 8th ed. Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier; Philadelphia: 2015. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s principles and practice of infectious diseases. Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Avery RK, Lard M, et al. Histoplasmosis in solid organ transplant recipients: 10 years of experience at a large transplant center in an endemic area. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 49: 710–716.
PMID:19635026(PubMed abstract) Peddi VR, Hariharan S, First MR. Disseminated histoplasmosis in renal allograft recipients. Clin Transplant. 1996;10:160–165.
PMID:8664511(PubMed abstract)
Gajurel K, Dhakal R, Deresinski S. Histoplasmosis in transplant recipients. Clin Transplant. 2017;31:e13087.
PMID:28805270(PubMed abstract)
Assi, M., Martin, S., Wheat, L. J., Hage, C., Freifeld, A., Avery, R., Kaul, D. R. (2013). Histoplasmosis After Solid Organ Transplant. Clinical Infectious Diseases: An Official Publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, 57(11), 1542–1549.
PMID:24046304(PubMed abstract)
Kauffman, C. A., & Miceli, M. H. (2015). Histoplasmosis and Blastomycosis in Solid Organ Transplant Recipients. Journal of Fungi, 1(2), 94–106.
PMID:29376901(PubMed abstract)
Mandell G.L., Bennett J.E., Dolin R. 8th ed. Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier; Philadelphia: 2015. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s principles and practice of infectious diseases.
Cuellar-Rodriguez J, Avery RK, Lard M, et al. Histoplasmosis in solid organ transplant recipients: 10 years of experience at a large transplant center in an endemic area. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 49: 710–716.
PMID:19635026(PubMed abstract)
Peddi VR, Hariharan S, First MR. Disseminated histoplasmosis in renal allograft recipients. Clin Transplant. 1996;10:160–165.
PMID:8664511(PubMed abstract)
