History of Present Illness
Summary: A woman with a swollen and painful finger.
A woman in her forties presented with a red, swollen and painful left third finger distal phalanx of two days duration. There was no history of trauma or fever and she had never had a similar problem in the past. There was no history of herpes simplex infection.
The patient had punctured the lesion with a needle the day before presentation; no purulent drainage was obtained. The patient presented due to increasing discomfort.
Past Medical History
Past medical history included asthma and hypothyroidism.
Epidemiological History
The patient cared for a relative with Alzheimer's disease who had recently had lesions described as "cold sores".
Physical Examination
She appeared well. The temperature was 100°F (37.8°C), other vital signs were normal. There was redness, swelling, tenderness and slight "bubbly" appearance of the entire left middle finger nail fold, without fluctuance. A small amount of purulent material extruded from the lesion the patient had pricked. See Figures 1 and 2 . A small amount of subcutaneous blood was also present. There was no lymphangitis or proximal lymphadenopathy.
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Figure 2. Physical findings.
Studies
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
An intact vesicle was incised and cultured. Standard bacterial and herpes virus cultures were sent; the standard culture grew pan-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus and the viral culture was positive for Herpes simplex virus.
Treatment and Followup
At the time of the first visit, the patient was started on dicloxacillin.
Two days later, the culture results were available and the patient was notified. She reported that the finger felt worse, and acyclovir 400 milligrams, three times daily, for primary herpes infection was added to the dicloxacillin. Her symptoms increased during the following day and were much improved by five days later.
Discussion
Apparent infections of the distal finger are not always bacterial infections. The small areas of loculated fluid (Figure 2) have a flatter appearance than the vesicles usually seen in Herpes simplex infections due to the thicker epithelium of the finger. This appearance should suggest the possibility of a viral etiology.
The social history - such as an occupation of dental or health care worker, or exposure to oral or genital herpes - may suggest a source. Attempts to drain all collections of fluid or pus may result in more severe symptoms for the patient with herpetic whitlow.
Final Diagnosis
Herpetic whitlow of the left third finger with possible Staphylococcus aureus superinfection.
References
Rubright, J.H., and Shafritz, A.B. (2011). The herpetic whitlow. J Hand Surg Am 36, 340-342.
PMID:21186084 ( PubMed abstract )
Wu, I.B., and Schwartz, R.A. (2007). Herpetic whitlow. Cutis 79, 193-196.
PMID:17674583 ( PubMed abstract )
