History of Present Illness
Summary: A young child with a fever, rash and mouth ulcers.
A young child with a history of eczema was admitted with a 6-day history of temperatures to 103°F (39.4°C), diffuse tender lymphadenopathy, increasing eczema with scabbing, rhinorrhea, and mouth ulcers.
Two days before admission, a pediatrician prescribed clarithromycin to treat a bacterial superinfection of the eczema. The skin condition worsened and the patient developed diffuse lesions, described as “small blisters”, on the hands, feet and legs. The child was brought to the hospital for further evaluation. The mother reported that the patient had been eating poorly because of a sore mouth, and had lost two pounds in one week.
Past Medical History
The patient's past history included:
1. Eczema, with episodes of cellulitis multiple times each year
2. Streptococcal pharyngitis
3. Aphthous ulcers
4. Surgical repair of an atrial septal defect
Medications
Clarithromycin.
Allergies
The patient was allergic to penicillin, cephalosporins, and multiple foods.
Epidemiological History
The child lived in an urban area of the United States Northeast. There was no history of recent travel, ill contacts, or insect bites.
Physical Examination
The patient was afebrile and in no distress. There was a normal oropharynx without oral or perioral ulcers. There was shotty cervical and groin adenopathy; no organomegaly was palpated. Sparse small vesicles were present on an erythematous base overlying erythematous, largely scabbed plaques on the anterior thighs, shins, ankles, and feet. There were intact periungual vesicles near the 2nd and 3rd digits of the right hand and over the ankle.
Figure 1. Physical findings.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
An intact vesicle was unroofed and sent for immunofluorescent assay (IFA) and viral culture. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) was detected by the IFA and HSV-1 grew on viral culture. A swab obtained from a weeping area of lower leg grew Staphylococcus aureus on bacterial culture.
Treatment and Followup
After one week of therapy with acyclovir and clindamycin, there was near total resolution of the lesions.
Discussion
Eczema herpeticum has also been called “Kaposi’s varicelliform eruption due to herpes simplex virus.” It frequently occurs in atopic individuals, such as this patient, or in persons with other skin conditions which compromise the epidermis. The stomatitis described by the mother might have represented primary herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection. Mouth-hand contact may have lead to herpetic whitlow with subsequent spread of the viral infection to the legs.
Varicella could be considered given the appearance of vesicles of different ages but the limited distribution to areas of atopic dermatitis suggests HSV. While eczema herpeticum is usually limited to the skin, systemic dissemination can occur.
Mortality prior to the availability of antiviral therapy was as high as 9%. The coalescence of vesicles leads to plaques that look impetigenous; superinfection with Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pyogenes may also occur.
Final Diagnosis
Eczema herpeticum (herpes simplex virus-1 infection) with impetigo due to Staphylococcus aureus .
References
Brook, I. (2002). Secondary bacterial infections complicating skin lesions. J Med Microbiol 51, 808-812.
PMID:12435058 ( PubMed abstract )
Wollenberg, A., Wetzel, S., Burgdorf, W.H., and Haas, J. (2003). Viral infections in atopic dermatitis: pathogenic aspects and clinical management. J Allergy Clin Immunol 112, 667-674.
PMID:14564342 ( PubMed abstract )
