History of Present Illness
2008 ICAAC/IDSA Pediatric Fellows' Day Case Presentation Summary: A pre-teen boy with left hip pain.
A pre-teen boy presented with a 5-week history of left hip pain and limping.
During the previous 2 months, he had had several minor injuries during football practice. Five weeks before, a throbbing pain, which radiated from the left hip to the ankle, developed. The pain was constant, improved with rest, but increased with activity and at night. There was no fever, weight loss, headache, or cough.
Past Medical History
At 6 months of age, he presented with Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia and subsequently was diagnosed with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency. Three months later, he underwent a T-cell depleted haploidentical allogeneic hematopoetic stem cell transplant from his mother with no pre-transplant chemotherapy or post-transplant graft-versus-host-disease (GVHD) prophylaxis. He developed excellent T-cell engraftment, but B-cell function remained poor, requiring monthly intravenous immunoglobulin infusions. During the past 8 years, there had been no serious or opportunistic infections, or graft versus host disease.
Medications
Medications included monthly intravenous immunoglobulin infusions via a peripheral venous catheter.
Epidemiological History
The patient lived with his parents, had no siblings and no sick contacts and was an avid athlete, who participated in contact sports. There were numerous goose droppings on the field where he was practiced.
Physical Examination
The patient was overweight, and otherwise appeared well. Vital signs, including temperature, were normal. There was tenderness on flexion and internal rotation of the left hip but no erythema, swelling, or warmth was present. He ambulated with a limp. The remainder of the physical examination was normal.
Studies
The white blood cell count was 11,000/mm³ (neutrophils 64%, lymphocytes 21%, monocytes 11%, and eosinophils 4%) and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 67 mm/hour. The hemoglobin concentration and platelet count were normal.
Analysis of lymphocytes by flow cytometry demonstrated 15.8% CD4 T-cell lymphocytes (reference range 33-41%) with an absolute number of 420 cells/ml (reference range 700-1100 cells/ml). The levels of CD3 and CD8 T-cell lymphocytes were normal, and the percentages were slightly low. The ratio of CD4 to CD8 lymphocytes was normal. The percentage and absolute number of CD19 B-cell lymphocytes were elevated. The T-cell proliferative responses to mitogens and antigens were normal. Quantitative immunoglobulin (Ig) levels, while the patient was receiving immunoglobulins intravenously, were IgG 1230 mg/dl (reference range 698-1560 mg/dl), 2 weeks after his monthly immunoglobulin infusion; IgM 112 mg/dl (reference range 31-179 mg/dl); and IgA less than 50 mg/dl (reference range 53-204 mg/dl).
A radiograph of the left proximal femur showed a lytic lesion and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a lytic lesion in the left femoral head with disruption of the cortex. (Figures 1 and 2.)
Figure 1. Radiograph of the left hip.
Figure 2. MRI of the left hip.
Clinical Course Prior to Diagnosis
The patient was admitted for biopsy of the lesion, and an open, fluoroscopic-guided biopsy and curettage of the proximal, medial left femur was performed. His pain improved post-operatively.
Diagnostic Procedure(s) and Result(s)
Pathological examination of the biopsy using hematoxylin and eosin stain (Figure 3) revealed foci of necrotizing granulomata and histiocytes with numerous yeast forms, many with identifiable surrounding non-staining capsules (see arrows). Gomori methenamine silver stain (Figures 4 and 5) showed budding yeast with a narrow base, morphologically suggestive of Cryptococcus species.
A gram stain of the aspirate was negative for organisms; only few white cells were seen. Routine bacterial, fungal, and mycobacterial culture of the surgical specimen were negative. The blood culture of the bone aspirate grew yeast, subsequently identified as Cryptococcus neoformans.
Additional studies included a chest radiograph that was normal, and examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which had normal cell counts, and levels of glucose and protein. CSF bacterial and fungal cultures were negative, and the level of cryptococcal antigen in the CSF was negative by latex agglutination. Serum cryptococcal antigen was positive to a dilution of greater than 1:4096 (normal, negative).
Figure 3. Biopsy of lesion (H and E stain)
Figure 4. Biopsy of lesion (GMS stain).
Figure 5. Biopsy of lesion (GMS stain), higher magnification.
Treatment and Followup
Fluconazole, 400 mg daily, was administered orally. After two months of treatment, he remained asymptomatic and serum cryptococcal antigen had decreased to positive at 1:16 dilution. After 5 months of treatment, his serum cryptococcal antigen was negative. Fluconazole therapy (400 mg daily) for 1 year was planned.
Discussion
Cryptococcus neoformans is an encapsulated yeast which grows at 37°C and in the environment. It is isolated from soil - especially soil contaminated with pigeon droppings - and it is acquired by inhalation.
Most patients with dissemination have defects in cell-mediated immunity caused by chemotherapy, congenital immune deficiency, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, or transplantation and immunosuppression to prevent rejection. However, cryptococcosis can also occur in healthy individuals.
The clinical presentation varies from asymptomatic or symptomatic pulmonary involvement to hematogenous dissemination to any organ. The immunosuppressed patient may present with multiple organ involvement.
The two most common sites of infection involve the central nervous system (CNS) and the lungs. Meningitis is the most common infection caused by Cryptococcus neoformans. The course is usually indolent, with headache, fever, cranial nerve palsies, and altered mental status, and the presentation may be subtle with personality changes only. Cryptococcus can also cause a pneumonitis syndrome with cough, chest pain, and constitutional symptoms. The chest radiograph may show diffuse or focal infiltrates, a solitary nodule, or hilar lymphadenopathy. In each case, careful assessment of the CNS is required to rule out occult meningitis.
The first case of cryptococcal infection described, by Busse and Buschke in 1894, was osteomyelitis of the tibia. Nevertheless, cryptococcal osteomyelitis is a relatively rare manifestation of cryptococcal disease: and only 39 case descriptions of cryptococcal osteomyelitis have been published in a review over 30 years [Behrman 1990]. Bone infection occurs in about 5% to 10% of patients with disseminated cryptococcosis. Pain and swelling can be present but bone lesions are often found incidentally. Radiographs typically reveal well-defined osteolytic lesions without marginal sclerosis or periosteal change. Joint involvement is rare [Long et al. 2008].
Once a cryptococcal infection is suspected, the diagnosis of cryptococcosis is established by isolation of Cryptococcus neoformans in culture from body fluids or tissue, or detection of cryptococcal capsular antigen in blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or urine [Long et al. 2008]. The serologic tests for detection of cryptococcal polysaccharide antigen in serum and CSF are extremely accurate for the diagnosis of invasive disease. Both latex agglutination and enzyme immunoassay tests are greater than 90% specific, and in HIV-infected patients more than 90% sensitive, for invasive infection [Perfect 2005]. In HIV-negative patients, however, serum cryptococcal antigen is positive only in 56% and 86% of those with pulmonary and CNS disease, respectively, and thus less reliable [Pappas et al. 2001].
At the time of this publication, patients with severe cryptococcosis and/or meningitis are treated with combination therapy, which includes amphotericin B and flucytosine for 2 weeks followed by a longer course (minimum of 10 weeks) of fluconazole. For children with mild-to-moderate cryptococcosis that does not involve the central nervous system, fluconazole alone can be considered for primary therapy [Long et al 2008]. Following treatment, suppressive doses of fluconazole may be needed as long as immunosuppression persists.
Final Diagnosis
Cryptococcus neoformans osteomyelitis of the femoral head in a patient with severe combined immunodeficiency status post remote stem cell transplant.
References
Behrman, R.E., Masci, J.R., and Nicholas, P. (1990). Cryptococcal skeletal infections: case report and review. Rev Infect Dis 12, 181-190.
PMID:2184491(PubMed abstract) Busse and Buschke(1894) Long S, Pickering L, Prober C, (2008) Cryptococcus Species, Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Edition 3, p. 1196-1197 Pappas, P.G., Perfect, J.R., Cloud, G.A., Larsen, R.A., Pankey, G.A., Lancaster, D.J., Henderson, H., Kauffman, C.A., Haas, D.W., Saccente, M., Hamill, R.J., Holloway, M.S., Warren, R.M., and Dismukes, W.E. (2001). Cryptococcosis in human immunodeficiency virus-negative patients in the era of effective azole therapy. Clin Infect Dis 33, 690-699.
PMID:11477526(PubMed abstract) Perfect JR (2005).Chapter 261 Cryptococcus neoformans, in Mandell G, Bennett J, Dolin R, Edition 6. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. p. 3006
Behrman, R.E., Masci, J.R., and Nicholas, P. (1990). Cryptococcal skeletal infections: case report and review. Rev Infect Dis 12, 181-190.
PMID:2184491(PubMed abstract)
Busse and Buschke(1894)
Long S, Pickering L, Prober C, (2008) Cryptococcus Species, Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Edition 3, p. 1196-1197
Pappas, P.G., Perfect, J.R., Cloud, G.A., Larsen, R.A., Pankey, G.A., Lancaster, D.J., Henderson, H., Kauffman, C.A., Haas, D.W., Saccente, M., Hamill, R.J., Holloway, M.S., Warren, R.M., and Dismukes, W.E. (2001). Cryptococcosis in human immunodeficiency virus-negative patients in the era of effective azole therapy. Clin Infect Dis 33, 690-699.
PMID:11477526(PubMed abstract)
Perfect JR (2005).Chapter 261 Cryptococcus neoformans, in Mandell G, Bennett J, Dolin R, Edition 6. Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. p. 3006
